[Amit Varma]: All of us have heard stories of partition. Families torn apart, loved ones killed, women
[Amit Varma]: raped, lives destroyed, trains arriving in stations filled with dead bodies. Victims
[Amit Varma]: of slaughter not just of humans, but humanity. I've heard these stories all my life, but
[Amit Varma]: they seem distant and far away, as if they were from an old novel, or even when they
[Amit Varma]: were real, as if they were from a black and white picture book and not really real. We
[Amit Varma]: all know that in our lives, we will face personal grief. People we love will die, and then we
[Amit Varma]: will die. But we have always assumed or at least hoped that as a nation, we would not
[Amit Varma]: encounter collective grief again. Well, here we are. This time the details are different.
[Amit Varma]: We don't yet know how many have died in India because of COVID-19 and how many will die.
[Amit Varma]: What we do know is that the suffering this time is far more widespread than at any other
[Amit Varma]: time in our history. It has touched every corner of this country I love. Every morning
[Amit Varma]: these days, I spend half an hour after I wake up just writing condolence messages. I'm so
[Amit Varma]: sorry for your loss. Take care, get better soon. In places like Delhi, every single friend
[Amit Varma]: I have is affected. And I believe it is worse in our heartlands, where the hospitals cannot
[Amit Varma]: run out of oxygen, because there are no hospitals, where people get ill, and then they die. And
[Amit Varma]: there is no cause of death noted down, no accounting to be made. A few days ago, my
[Amit Varma]: father also died. The municipality didn't allow us near his body, understandably so,
[Amit Varma]: or inside the crematorium. We watched from a distance until one man came and pointed
[Amit Varma]: to the smoke coming from a distant tower. That was the last I saw of my father. I remember
[Amit Varma]: looking at the apartment complex 100 meters away, and wondered what it would be like to
[Amit Varma]: live in an apartment facing that tower. All day, you could look outside the window and
[Amit Varma]: see lives go up in smoke. Well, we are all living in that apartment. And whether you
[Amit Varma]: look outside or you look within, this is what you will see. Life's gone up in smoke in this
[Amit Varma]: great country of ours in this 21st century.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is a brilliant economist, Ajay Shah.
[Amit Varma]: We discuss the economics and politics of vaccines. Both of us believe that our government made
[Amit Varma]: a tragic error in not getting vaccines out there on a war footing. It spent too much
[Amit Varma]: time. It was hobbled by the ideologies of central planning and Atma Nirbharta, and it
[Amit Varma]: still hasn't learned all the lessons it should have. Ajay helps me get to the heart of the
[Amit Varma]: matter. And I understand the subject much better after this conversation. How could
[Amit Varma]: we have vaccinated more people? Who should have made these vaccines? How should they
[Amit Varma]: have been distributed? How should we have arrived at a price? We discuss all this in
[Amit Varma]: today's episode, though we spend the first half of it talking about Indian healthcare.
[Amit Varma]: Our healthcare system has been broken for decades. It was always going to collapse in
[Amit Varma]: the face of a challenge like COVID-19. That is why some of us were so terrified in March
[Amit Varma]: last year. We worried about the sort of scenes that we are seeing today in Delhi and elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: We were lucky in April 2020 for a number of reasons to escape that fate. But we should
[Amit Varma]: have used that time to prepare. And we did not. Well, let's look ahead. What can we do
[Amit Varma]: now? Healthcare is perhaps the hardest problem to solve in India. So there are no easy answers.
[Amit Varma]: But we do need to try and understand the nature of this problem. In his usual lucid style,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay gave me many insights in this conversation. But before we get to that, let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that
[Amit Varma]: many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between
[Amit Varma]: 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave
[Amit Varma]: me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and
[Amit Varma]: was forced to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please
[Amit Varma]: do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to
[Amit Varma]: go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the last time we spoke was in Feb. In fact, I, you know, I was while setting
[Amit Varma]: the session up, I realized that we recorded on 4th Feb, where we spoke about the farm
[Amit Varma]: bills, which by the way, is one of my top 10 downloaded episodes already. I think it's
[Amit Varma]: moved up to number eight, as of now, a combination both of the urgency of the subject and I would
[Amit Varma]: say the lucidity of your explanations. But interestingly, in that episode, for the first
[Amit Varma]: half, we kind of actually spoke about your new interest in public health and healthcare
[Amit Varma]: and so on, especially in a COVID context. And sadly, the time has kind of come to go
[Amit Varma]: a little deeper into that because of everything that is happening. But before we do that,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about the recent weeks for you. Where are you? Have you been well?
[Amit Varma]: What's it been like in general?
[Guest]: Mercifully, I've been well, my people have been well. But for the rest, like everybody
[Guest]: else, this is just a nightmare. We keep hearing of friends and friends of friends, person
[Guest]: x reaches out to person y help find me oxygen help find me an ICU bed. It is a relentless
[Guest]: assault on the soul. You just get exhausted. You just keep wondering and praying. Is there
[Guest]: something we could do different?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, there's a new term for this now called doom scrolling, where you just
[Amit Varma]: kind of go on Twitter and you're doom scrolling. You're just it's horrendous. I've never seen
[Amit Varma]: anything like this. And I think, you know, the collective trauma that we're going through
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, in one sense, even greater than partition because it's spread out everywhere
[Amit Varma]: throughout the country. Like, I'm sure every home in this country knows someone who has
[Amit Varma]: suffered or died and so on. And especially when I talk to my friends in Delhi, like everybody
[Amit Varma]: has, you know, is going through shit right now.
[Guest]: I have experienced a very peculiar conflict in my head. And I'm sure you will understand
[Guest]: it in a flash. And let me just say it. So I'm reminded of the British side in World
[Guest]: War Two, where the binding constraint was the number of pilots. You could do everything
[Guest]: else. You can build planes in a hurry. You can do all kinds of things in a hurry, but
[Guest]: you can't create a good pilot in a hurry. So that's my intuition about thinking about
[Guest]: the health care system. We are where we are. You have a certain amount of doctors, you
[Guest]: have a certain amount of nurses. They're working flat out 18 hours a day. And in the short
[Guest]: run, their supply elasticity is zero. There is nothing you can do to augment the skilled
[Guest]: staff inside the health care facilities. You can do a little bit more quickly in terms
[Guest]: of putting up some ICU beds and some little more oxygen therapy. But fundamentally, in
[Guest]: the short term, it is impossible to change the number of health care workers. In that
[Guest]: case, as a society, as a system, it's curtains. There's 100 beds of capacity. And if there
[Guest]: are 200 people who require that capacity, then there's just the horrendous choice of
[Guest]: triaging and choosing which 100 are going to get in. And each of us would love to have
[Guest]: our friends and family access those beds. But in system thinking, that's no answer because
[Guest]: any one person that gets in is coming at the expense of somebody else. And how do you make
[Guest]: those moral choices? Similarly, as an economist, it has always been apparent to me that if
[Guest]: you put more money into the problem right now, all that happens is that the demand curve
[Guest]: intersects with the rigid supply curve at a higher price. All you do with a little more
[Guest]: money buying health care services at a time like this is driving up the price. You don't
[Guest]: change the brute reality, which is that there are 200 people demanding a capacity of 100.
[Guest]: And in the short term, that capacity cannot be changed.
[Amit Varma]: A few strands. I mean, one, of course, when you speak of the moral choices we have to
[Amit Varma]: make, some of these choices come down totally to privilege and power. For example, there
[Amit Varma]: was this heartbreaking video of this person who'd got an oxygen cylinder for his father
[Amit Varma]: or uncle or whatever, who obviously needed it badly and was going to die. And the cops
[Amit Varma]: came and they confiscated it from him because they wanted to take it for a VIP, which just
[Amit Varma]: kind of tells you the colonial mindset of the state. And you know, one of the really
[Amit Varma]: heartening things about the last couple of weeks also has another side to it. It's like
[Amit Varma]: the scene and the unseen, which is, you know, on the one hand, it's heartening that everyone
[Amit Varma]: who's reached out on Twitter has just got so much help from people like just now before,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this recording began. And this is like 2pm on April 29. And just before this
[Amit Varma]: recording began, I saw this tweet from my good friend, Joy Bhattacharya, who said that
[Amit Varma]: he knows of at least 12 people who have been helped by reaching out on Twitter, which is
[Amit Varma]: great. But the unseen side of that is that there are 12 other people who didn't get that
[Amit Varma]: help. Because everything is limited. There is an opportunity cost even for that. And
[Amit Varma]: sure, you know, we kind of have the privilege even anyone who can use Twitter and reach
[Amit Varma]: out like that and get amplified also has a certain amount of privilege. And I'm happy
[Amit Varma]: for everyone who's, you know, managed to get help and all of that in these difficult times.
[Amit Varma]: But the brute reality is that if there are 200 beds and 500 people who need them, 300
[Amit Varma]: people are just gone. I mean, it's a pretty horrible situation. And last year in March,
[Amit Varma]: I remember, you know, I recorded an episode on COVID, the first of my many episodes on
[Amit Varma]: COVID in general, and my guest in that one was Shruti Rajgopalan. And before we recorded
[Amit Varma]: that episode, you know, as far back as March last year, she was telling me about what could
[Amit Varma]: happen to the healthcare system in India. And from her experiences of her friends in
[Amit Varma]: Italy, where she had lived and all, Bergamo and so on. And it didn't happen. And I thought,
[Amit Varma]: okay, great, we got lucky, you know, whether it was lockdown or a combination of other
[Amit Varma]: factors that people have speculated on, we got lucky it didn't happen. And it's happened
[Amit Varma]: now. And it's happened a year later. And you kind of realize,
[Guest]: So I think we always knew that the Indian healthcare system doesn't work so well. And
[Guest]: the capacity in the healthcare system is minuscule. So, you know, in my mind's eye, this was always
[Guest]: on my mind. I remember, back in February and March 2020, I was writing the first paper
[Guest]: on this subject that I happened to work on. I've written many, many things on the subject.
[Guest]: But my first writing was in February and March, I was writing a paper on the subject. And
[Guest]: my co author and I were kind of playing this out in our mind's eye. And it was just chilling,
[Guest]: because you do the arithmetic, you know, you just multiply through by some plausible hospitalization
[Guest]: rates by some plausible fatality rates, multiplied by the Indian age structure of the population.
[Amit Varma]: And what you get is quite a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that this pandemic has sort of done for us, and I've written a column
[Amit Varma]: on this last year as well, is that it's laid bare a greater ongoing disaster, which is
[Amit Varma]: our dysfunctional flailing state, right? And one subset of that, and not even a subset
[Amit Varma]: of that, there's a small overlap. But another thing that is laid bare is obviously how,
[Amit Varma]: what a bad state our healthcare is in. Now, you pointed out about how our healthcare workers
[Amit Varma]: are limited, there are only so many doctors, and there are only so many nurses. And what
[Amit Varma]: they are doing is just incredibly heroic. Most of them going well beyond the call of
[Amit Varma]: duty and the kind of risks they take and the kind of service they're putting in, but they're
[Amit Varma]: limited. Give me a sense now, that if you look at it outside the context of the pandemic,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how can we quantify the shortcomings in our healthcare system, especially in something
[Amit Varma]: like this? Like, are there figures that you know, in a developed country, there would
[Amit Varma]: be so many doctors plus 1000 people in the population, so many nurses or whatever? Are
[Amit Varma]: there quantifiable ways to think about how in terms of healthcare we are so far behind?
[Guest]: Here, I'm afraid I'm going to go all economist on you. So this is about money. This is about
[Guest]: affluence. It's about how much you're willing to spend. So it turns on the ratio between
[Guest]: the income of a doctor and the income of the general population. Okay, so if you live in
[Guest]: a country where your income is good vis-a-vis a doctor's income, then you're going to fare
[Guest]: relatively well, because using your income, you're going to be able to buy many man hours
[Guest]: of a doctor's time, and vice versa. So now the large mass of the Indian population has
[Guest]: an income, where, frankly, meaningful levels of training in the doctor are unaffordable.
[Guest]: So I classify that as a poverty problem. I classify that as an underdevelopment problem,
[Guest]: that it is just baked in. It is inevitable that when we're a poor country, and because
[Guest]: building a doctor is like building an RAF pilot is something that takes thousands of
[Guest]: hours of training, it's a considerable investment. And it's not possible to make a particularly
[Guest]: cheap doctor. We can try. We need to improve processes and bring down the cost of healthcare.
[Guest]: We need more telemedicine. We need more AI-based diagnosis systems backed by just a nurse.
[Guest]: They are all great directions to go in. But the brute fact is that there is a poverty
[Guest]: problem. So I think those, the metrics that you refer to are a bit dangerous, because
[Guest]: we slip into a first world way of thinking. And that's not a fair comparison against where
[Guest]: we are in India today. So in India today, we should be asking the question that at Indian
[Guest]: levels of income, what can you do different? And in my opinion, we need to do a revolution
[Guest]: in AI plus nurse rather than a doctor, because for the foreseeable future, there's not going
[Guest]: to be a doctor. We need to do much more with telemedicine. And again, the telemedicine
[Guest]: can be some hybrid of a doctor or an AI at the other end. It doesn't even have to be
[Guest]: a human being all the time. And then we turn to healthcare system design. And this turns
[Guest]: on problems like what's the nature of the market failure in healthcare? And the market
[Guest]: failure of healthcare is basically a crisis of asymmetric information. When you are faced
[Guest]: with a hospital and the hospital says that your mother needs a ventilator, and if you
[Guest]: don't sign on this piece of paper right now, she's going to die. What are you going to
[Guest]: do? So there is extreme mis-selling by private healthcare providers. And the question is,
[Guest]: how do we reorganize healthcare so as to address that market failure and produce better behavior
[Guest]: out of private providers? And then somewhere in this, the least important element of the
[Guest]: Indian healthcare system is there is one large PSU who's called the government. So the government
[Guest]: is not thinking health policy. The government is thinking I'm one big PSU. So there is many,
[Guest]: many government hospitals. There are many, many government departments of health, and
[Guest]: they seem to concentrate on being a PSU. So think of an old department of telecom, which
[Guest]: was thinking that they are in the telephony business. That's the Indian health establishment.
[Guest]: And this is part of the story about why we do so badly on health policy, because the
[Guest]: DNA of the Indian health policy community is to look at the world from the worldview
[Guest]: of a healthcare PSU. And they are not used to worrying about their own operational capabilities
[Guest]: and efficiency. And they are used to just always asking for more money. So their answer
[Guest]: is always more money. If you speak to any conventional health expert in India, the story
[Guest]: is give me more money. And that's not a very useful way to approach it. Because neither
[Guest]: does the healthcare PSU work too well, nor does the private sector healthcare work too
[Guest]: well. So, you know, we are caught between two bad things that are happening in the country.
[Guest]: And that's the essence of what is wrong with Indian healthcare today. The puzzle, the thinking
[Guest]: challenge, the research challenge is how to understand this landscape, how to create the
[Guest]: data sets that will support the research on this landscape, and how to find our way out
[Guest]: of this problem. And I don't pretend to have the answers. But I am at this level of knowledge
[Guest]: that I am able to succinctly pose the questions.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating, because I was going to take a couple of strands and ask you for potential
[Amit Varma]: answers for that. And I'm going to try and do that anyway. And one of those strands is
[Amit Varma]: this that just as Indians understand that there is no rule of law effectively in this
[Amit Varma]: country for most people, unless you're incredibly privileged. You know, people have Jugaadu
[Amit Varma]: ways of getting by their social trust, and all of those things come into play. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: there isn't really a healthcare system, a functional healthcare system in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that most individuals in this country are one medical emergency away from just going
[Amit Varma]: broke. You know, that's just a fact of the matter. You know, I've written about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so many other problems India's face, but this is one field where I haven't quite
[Amit Varma]: gotten and handled on the structural problems. For example, we can look at something like
[Amit Varma]: education and say that, okay, here's a structural problem, the incentives for the state are
[Amit Varma]: bad in terms of provision, and it should just allow far more private provision and just
[Amit Varma]: let society solve its own problems while simultaneously trying to beef up state capacity and do what
[Amit Varma]: it's doing. Similarly, you know, we've discussed the problems of agriculture in our last episode,
[Amit Varma]: and I've, you know, gone deeper into it in previous episodes before that. But what is
[Amit Varma]: the problem with healthcare? Because in the eyes of the common man, you're just in denial
[Amit Varma]: that you're ever going to fall ill. You know, just as we have an illusion of immortality,
[Amit Varma]: which keeps us away from thinking about the fact that we have a limited time span, although
[Amit Varma]: sadly in the last few days, I think many more people have had occasion to ponder on that.
[Amit Varma]: But just as we have that illusion of immortality, and we live as you're going to live forever,
[Amit Varma]: we also have this illusion of good health. And we are in denial of the fact that someday
[Amit Varma]: we will require medical help. And the impression most people will have of say, private medical
[Amit Varma]: health in India is that it's almost like a scam, almost like a racket. I think Rana Das
[Amit Varma]: Gupta wrote a book about this a few years ago about the situation in Delhi that you
[Amit Varma]: go to any of these big hospitals, and they'll give you hazard tests, which you don't require,
[Amit Varma]: and they'll completely fleece you. And their incentives are tailored towards doing that
[Amit Varma]: doctors incentives are tailored towards prescribing more and more tests. So the hospital makes
[Amit Varma]: money and blah, blah, blah, and everything seems kind of broken. And of course, the public
[Amit Varma]: healthcare in India is the worst. So the answer is, isn't even that. So structurally, what
[Amit Varma]: are the problems that they are and given the poverty, you know, are they solvable? Or do
[Guest]: we need to solve for poverty first?
[Guest]: So again, I will go all economist on you that whatever x rupees are being spent, the puzzle
[Guest]: is on how to get the most bang for the buck. Okay, so I just treat the poverty problem
[Guest]: as given, okay, one day, we're gonna get rich, and that'll get better. So it is incredibly
[Guest]: important to push for broad GDP growth is the greatest weapon to solve all these problems.
[Guest]: But right now, let's stick to an allocative problem. I have a funny story. The year was
[Guest]: 2004. I was sitting with my dear friends, Jeff Hammer and Lance Pritchett. At the time,
[Guest]: my mind used to be filled with macroeconomics and finance. And we were doing a furious conversation
[Guest]: around some of old things, some of those things. And at some point, both of them stopped and
[Guest]: said, you know, Ajay, you're a very smart guy. You think you're thinking a lot about
[Guest]: macro and finance. But you know what, when you grow up, you're going to have to do health.
[Guest]: And I was like, huh. And they said, everything that you're doing is trivial. And the really
[Guest]: hard problem is health, that actually, you know, fixing monetary policy, doing an inflation
[Guest]: targeting system with the Monetary Policy Committee and narrow down the function of
[Guest]: the central bank.
[Guest]: It's kind of obvious, and it's really not hard. There's just some pesky political problems
[Guest]: you have to solve. But it's not really hard. It's kind of trivial. Similarly, you want
[Guest]: to do international trade. Frankly, you know, at the end of the tunnel, there's basically
[Guest]: only one thing to do, which is remove all trade barriers. Okay, you can do it in an
[Guest]: obfuscated way, you can do it in a complicated way, but there's really nothing hard there,
[Guest]: and so on. Whereas, the truly difficult thing is health. Why? In my opinion, the pieces
[Guest]: of it are as follows.
[Guest]: The first is that there is such a profound amount of asymmetric information. You and
[Guest]: I really don't know what the doctor does. You and I really don't know the marginal contribution
[Guest]: of a doctor. To kind of make an education analogy, in education, we like to think that
[Guest]: we'll pay for test results. But there is the ever-present problem that some part of the
[Guest]: test results are baked in because of the child at home and family. And some of the test results
[Guest]: are the contribution of the teacher. So, for example, a school running in a slum will always
[Guest]: generate low test scores. And if we think we're going to pay something proportional
[Guest]: to the test scores, then we're doing something very unfair. So, it's very hard to disentangle
[Guest]: the contribution of the healthcare. You and I, as individual customers, are not very wise
[Guest]: in how we think of our healthcare providers. Too many of us go to quacks. We endlessly
[Guest]: submit to all kinds of nonsense where there is some alternative therapy or the other,
[Guest]: and we tend to take it more seriously than we should. Or we tend to care about a bedside
[Guest]: manner. We tend to think that a doctor who speaks nicely to me is a nice doctor. We tend
[Guest]: to think that a doctor who speaks in English knows more than a doctor who does not speak
[Guest]: in English, and so on. There is a hundred cognitive biases that are in play. And we
[Guest]: are all very smug, and we've persuaded ourselves that we understand this stuff, whereas actually
[Guest]: we don't. And that creates all the wrong incentives. So, hospitals have incentives to look like
[Guest]: five-star hotels, but that's not essential to the business of being a hospital. To be
[Guest]: a good hospital, you need to be clean, but you don't need to be like a five-star hotel.
[Guest]: Whereas the modern Indian healthcare industry is really building some expensive infrastructure
[Guest]: and loaning it out, renting it out to one doctor or one specialist after another. And
[Guest]: customers are just going by the glitz in the brand name and the marble foyer rather than
[Guest]: the substantive content of the knowledge and the value add of the healthcare. There are
[Guest]: important regional differences in some of these problems. So, some of my friends have
[Guest]: invested in many healthcare companies. They have purchased and successfully built and
[Guest]: exited many healthcare companies. And I remember one of the partners said to me that he has
[Guest]: never felt comfortable about buying a healthcare establishment in North India, because he felt
[Guest]: there is a pervasive ethical collapse in North India of the kind that you don't see in the
[Guest]: other parts of the country. So, in the West and the South, there is still a little more
[Guest]: of the ideal of a doctor as a service provider, of a doctor as a good person that is going
[Guest]: to take care of you. Whereas in North India, there seems to be a bigger collapse into just
[Guest]: craven commercial considerations, where a doctor misprescribes drugs and tests and gets
[Guest]: a kickback. Amusingly enough, I want to say that in the field of finance, we've gone after
[Guest]: kickbacks. We do more with mutual funds and insurance companies in blocking the kickbacks
[Guest]: from a manufacturer to the sales agent. Whereas in the field of medicine, we do nothing. We
[Guest]: do absolutely nothing today in blocking these kickbacks. And I consider these kickbacks
[Guest]: highly unethical, but they are the norm and not the exception.
[Guest]: Another anecdote, one of my colleagues in Delhi was experiencing a certain class of
[Guest]: concerns and she spoke with a person in Bombay on this question, who was a doctor. And the
[Guest]: feedback I got was that she should buy a ticket and come to Bombay and do this entire thing
[Guest]: in Bombay. They don't do it in Delhi because the healthcare establishment in Delhi is so
[Guest]: bad, it's so dangerous. Do your work in Bombay. There's more decency, there's more ethics,
[Guest]: there's more fair play in Bombay. Last anecdote, if I had a horrendous life-threatening situation,
[Guest]: what would I like to do? I'd like to buy a ticket and go to Christian Medical College,
[Guest]: Vellore. This is an old-fashioned place where doctors are paid a fixed salary and there
[Guest]: are no kickbacks. And in my opinion, it's the best healthcare in India.
[Guest]: So the profound asymmetry between the healthcare provider and the customer really poses a difficult
[Guest]: challenge for market-based thinking. And we in India are in some peculiar place where
[Guest]: there are some noble establishments like Christian Medical College, Vellore. There are some parts
[Guest]: of the country and there are some organizations who care more about the well-being of patients
[Guest]: and seem to do a better job. And then there is most of India, which is in a wasteland
[Guest]: of kickbacks and all the wrong incentives for doctors. Somewhere in this, we have to
[Guest]: bring in the distinction between the medicalization of healthcare and the problem of wellness.
[Guest]: If you pause to think about it, I think we spoke about it last time in the farm bills
[Guest]: thing, prevention is a thousand times better than cure. And you just come back at this
[Guest]: over and over and over. All of us should be prioritizing wellness a thousand times more
[Guest]: than we do with the healthcare. And in wellness, I would always go beyond the physical body
[Guest]: to the mind for two reasons. First is that because a healthy mind fosters a healthy body.
[Guest]: And the second is because the purpose of living is to have some peace of mind and happiness,
[Guest]: which is a mental state. It's not a physical state. So really the whole point of us being
[Guest]: alive and seeking utility and maximizing utils is about a state of mind. It's about having
[Guest]: peace of mind, being comfortable with what you are doing, finding meaning and purpose
[Guest]: in your life rather than being on a treadmill. So these problems are intricately connected
[Guest]: to the state of health of the person. A lot of the hard driving people who are extremely
[Guest]: ambitious are actually very messed up, both in terms of the state of mind and in the state
[Guest]: of body. So these are difficult, difficult problems. And the present Indian healthcare
[Guest]: establishment has no interest at all in you as a human being. They don't want to talk
[Guest]: about your state of stress and your unhealthy lifestyle. And what you really need a lot
[Guest]: of the time is a good talking to by a wise person saying, dude, you need to fix your
[Guest]: life. Instead, the healthcare provider is saying, yeah, come here. I'll put you under
[Guest]: the knife and I'll fix you up. And sure enough, two years from now, you're going to be messed
[Guest]: up again. This is a profoundly different perspective that I think we need to bring to bear on our
[Guest]: lives as individuals. But putting our heads into it as thinkers and economists and thinking
[Guest]: about the state and society, it is very difficult to create the correct incentives for a healthcare
[Guest]: system that would even pause to think about these things. Because for the healthcare provider,
[Guest]: it's literally how many rupees can I make per minute? So becoming avuncular and having
[Guest]: a good conversation with you is not that person's incentive.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it strikes me that there's an intersection of different domains here, which are kind
[Amit Varma]: of separate, like obviously one of those domains is this mental wellness stuff and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And a doctor who's there to treat the body who's been trained in say, cardiology or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, vascular disease or whatever might well say that look, I've been trained in this
[Amit Varma]: and this is what I will do the treatment in and the wellness is for other folks and I
[Amit Varma]: kind of get that. The other two sort of different domains and you'd elaborated on this last
[Amit Varma]: time and I intend to ask you about it after this question is of course, the two separate
[Amit Varma]: domains of public health and healthcare where public health really falls into prevention
[Amit Varma]: and should be the responsibility of the state. And healthcare is much more of a kind of private
[Amit Varma]: thing. But my specific question about the private situation remains in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, everybody wants to make money. Everybody's greedy, not just the doctors, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: am greedy, you are greedy in different ways. And everybody's not necessarily greedy for
[Amit Varma]: money, but that's fine. You want to make money? How do you make money? You make money by making
[Amit Varma]: someone else's life better off. It's a positive sum game. The incentives are good. Here, of
[Amit Varma]: course, the incentives are kind of the problem because the asymmetric information is getting
[Amit Varma]: in the way because patients don't know what's good for them. They have no option but to
[Amit Varma]: listen to what the doctor prescribes and the doctor will, you know, go down all of these
[Amit Varma]: roads where he gets maximum kickback and all that and they're responding to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: I guess there are two key questions. One is what can be done to change the situation of
[Amit Varma]: asymmetric information, like you're saying in other fields like finance and all things
[Amit Varma]: have been done and they're working to whatever extent and more importantly, how do you change
[Amit Varma]: the incentives like in any other domain that I think about the way to change the incentives
[Amit Varma]: is that you let competition thrive and competition is the best regulation and you know, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: kind of fall into place and by letting competition thrive, I mean, I don't just mean markets,
[Amit Varma]: I mean free markets. People often mix it up in India where we don't have free markets
[Amit Varma]: and anything at all. There is more and more cronyism where the whole idea is that big
[Amit Varma]: corporates want to keep competition out. But ideally, if you want to get the incentives
[Amit Varma]: right, you want to keep cronyism at bay, you want to keep state power at bay, you want
[Amit Varma]: the rule of law to be maintained, but you want competition. But in healthcare, the answer
[Amit Varma]: doesn't seem so simple. Like you said, for people who think about the world through this
[Amit Varma]: prism of voluntary action, positive sum games, competition, right incentives, all of that,
[Amit Varma]: somewhere it doesn't seem to apply, there is some problem. That's what I'm trying to
[Amit Varma]: put my finger on. So if I ask you to get specific, you know, what would that be?
[Guest]: The first piece would be that we are at the infancy in terms of studying and understanding
[Guest]: this field. And the first desperate need is more data. So we just don't know enough about
[Guest]: this field. So I recall many other fields where I have worked on in previous years,
[Guest]: generally, when the work program began, there was a fair evidentiary base. So there is a
[Guest]: burning crisis in this field, which is the lack of data. So we need to go into the reality
[Guest]: of India, where there is 60, 70, 80% private healthcare, and the remainder is public healthcare.
[Guest]: And we need to do measurement, measurement, measurement, make data sets and release them.
[Guest]: And maybe for 10, 20 years, that's all that we are able to do. And out of that will come
[Guest]: better knowledge. This is my first sense of what is it that should practically be done.
[Guest]: The first thing that needs to be done is we need to build data sets about what's actually
[Guest]: happening on the ground in the field of health. My second thought is that what we need is
[Guest]: sophisticated buyers who will exert countervailing force against sellers. Okay, so you and me
[Guest]: as customers, it doesn't work too well. I would readily have gone down the path of thinking
[Guest]: is there a role for the state and could you build some regulatory capacity? Could you
[Guest]: build some product liability, some tort law? And you should do a little bit of it, because
[Guest]: there is a role for some amount of liability and law and, you know, for example, just shutting
[Guest]: down the kickbacks is going to need force of law. So there is a need for tort law and
[Guest]: some amount of regulation. I say this softly, because at present, the project of the Indian
[Guest]: Regulatory State, the Indian Administrative State is really not working. So we need to
[Guest]: get to it at some point, but I'm not optimistic that that time is now, because right now that
[Guest]: project is in a bit of shambles. It's really working very poorly all across the landscape.
[Guest]: We're not succeeding on the business of law, courts, judiciary, enforcement, regulators,
[Guest]: regulation, regulators, of course, private people. I used to be more optimistic about
[Guest]: that agenda a while ago. Today, I think we've run aground and we need to really pick ourselves
[Guest]: up and make some of those basics work. And at a future date, it could have a significant
[Guest]: role in the field of health as well. And that's what brings me to sophisticated buyers. It
[Guest]: seems to me that the most useful thing to do today is to build a cadre of sophisticated
[Guest]: buyers and it can work in two ways. Basically, think of a health insurance company that says
[Guest]: to you that you give me X rupees a month and I'm responsible for all your health care.
[Guest]: And imagine we do enough work around that sentence so that they don't actually shortchange
[Guest]: you. Because all too often in India, the health insurance company is just rejecting your claims
[Guest]: and is saying, sorry, I'm not going to pay. Assume for a moment that we found our way
[Guest]: through that. And then that health insurance company is able to be a tough, sophisticated
[Guest]: buyer that can have negotiating power against health care organizations and can generate
[Guest]: better outcomes for the customer, can fight for the customer, can act for the customer.
[Guest]: Otherwise, right now, you and I are just in a very bad bargaining position when we step
[Guest]: into a hospital. And the more urgent and the more heartrending the situation, the greater
[Guest]: is the extent to which we are likely to just go along and say yes to something that an
[Guest]: employee of the hospital says. And that's unfortunately not a very good thing. I mentioned
[Guest]: a health maintenance organization, an HMO, which in the limit is a consortium of health
[Guest]: care organizations and insurance, where it all comes together that you sign on for a
[Guest]: comprehensive agreement and they take care of you for life. They have specified clinical
[Guest]: protocols through which they will deliver health care to you. And we need to worry about
[Guest]: consumer protection because they also have an incentive to underspend on your care. But
[Guest]: it seems to me that that's a good direction worth going in. And in India, the cutting
[Guest]: edge of this is insurance. But then you get into my old beat, which is insurance companies
[Guest]: and insurance regulation. And I have a fairly gloomy feeling about the state of capability
[Guest]: either in IRDA or in the insurance companies. So, none of these pathways are readily open
[Guest]: in India right now. They are all difficult, long journeys. That doesn't mean you should
[Guest]: not do them. So, if you tell me that a tree is going to take 20 years to fruition, I'll
[Guest]: say let's run out and plant it right now. So, it seems to me that work on data, work
[Guest]: on insurance companies, work on insurance regulation. These are the highest priorities
[Amit Varma]: in thinking about health care in India today.
[Amit Varma]: So, a couple of questions that arise from this. One is, you spoke about the need for
[Amit Varma]: data about, you know, we need to gather data better. We need more specific data sets and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And I just recorded an episode yesterday, which will actually go
[Amit Varma]: out after yours because, you know, vaccination is a more urgent subject. But I chatted with
[Amit Varma]: Gautam Menon, incredibly insightful episode. And if I remember correctly, I hope I'm not
[Amit Varma]: getting the source wrong. One of the things he spoke about in the episode was the data
[Amit Varma]: that we have in terms of cause of death. You know, about 80% of India won't give a, the
[Amit Varma]: deaths aren't recorded with a cause and blah, blah, blah. And the percentage where you actually
[Amit Varma]: know the cause of death that has happened is just something ludicrously low and therefore
[Amit Varma]: is not useful in any way. So, I understand that. And especially in the context of COVID,
[Amit Varma]: what we're seeing around us where, sorry.
[Guest]: Causes of death is an exotic frontier in India today. Counting the dead is the immediate
[Guest]: battle. You go to New York City, you get a website where every day the number of dead
[Guest]: are reported. That data is exotic in India today. You just don't have the number of deaths
[Guest]: in India. So, the municipalities know what's happening in the crematoriums, but they don't
[Guest]: release. So, basic health data infrastructure in India is lacking.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. And we are seeing that around us in these COVID times where not only don't
[Amit Varma]: we have accurate data about what's going on now, but it is likely that part of the reason
[Amit Varma]: for this present crisis was that we didn't get accurate data during the first wave as
[Amit Varma]: it were. And because we didn't understand the extent of the spread of the pandemic and
[Amit Varma]: the damage it caused, we didn't prepare as much as we should have. We weren't as alarmed
[Amit Varma]: as we should have been. We got complacent. But my specific question to you is this, that
[Amit Varma]: what kind of data sets are we talking about specifically? And what is the concrete difference
[Amit Varma]: that they make? You know that if you get X data, we'll be able to do Y thing or understand
[Amit Varma]: this aspect of the system better and make it better and pieces fall into place. Give
[Amit Varma]: me a sense of that with specifics if it's possible.
[Guest]: What works is to just think blow by blow about the activities in a system of interest and
[Guest]: then just think of putting numbers to the whole thing. That's how we think of data sets.
[Guest]: So let's start. Are people getting sick? Are people feeling well? Are people feeling healthy
[Guest]: is the first basic question. So you will get evidence about the extent to which people
[Guest]: say, I'm not feeling good today. And you will start looking at this on a map. You'll get
[Guest]: a heat map of where people are unwell in India. Is it younger people? Is it older people?
[Guest]: And so on. Right there, you will see some public health stories where arsenic in the
[Guest]: water makes you more unhealthy. And you know, it suggests public health interventions. OK,
[Guest]: fine. Then a person is feeling bad to the point where they seek health care. So I'd
[Guest]: like to know, you know, do different people have different psychological and affluence
[Guest]: trigger points for seeking health care? Very important to know that. What's the point at
[Guest]: which you decide that I'm going to go seek health care? What's the fever at which you
[Guest]: think it's OK to go to work? What's the fever at which you think it's not OK to go to work?
[Guest]: And then you decide that, OK, this is really no good. I've been down for three whole days.
[Guest]: Now I need to go find health care. OK, then do you choose to go to a private facility?
[Guest]: Do you choose to go to a public facility? Then think of fine grained data where you
[Guest]: have the GPS cards of the household and the GPS cards of the provider and what determines
[Guest]: provider choice. OK, then you need to start creating data sets that understand there are
[Guest]: different categories of providers. There are complete quacks. You call it whatever you
[Guest]: call it, ayurvedic or homeopathic or uncertified or whatever. There's all kinds of quacks in
[Guest]: the landscape. Do you go to quacks or do you go to something that claims some semblance
[Guest]: of a medical education? And then, of course, there are medical colleges in India that do
[Guest]: next to nothing in terms of teaching people. So what's the human capital of the provider
[Guest]: and what shapes the choice of the individual? How does an individual choose? So is it that
[Guest]: if there are two children in the house, there's a boy and there's a girl and the household
[Guest]: has different trigger points for the boy to get health care and the boy gets sent to some
[Guest]: serious MBBS doctor and the girl gets taken to a quack? OK, so what happens in the behavior
[Guest]: and the decision making of the household? Then what was the behavior and the decision
[Guest]: making of the providers that Jeff Hammers has once said to me that in his research on
[Guest]: India and medical care, here is his description of what actually happens in the modal conversation
[Guest]: between a health care professional and a patient. The patient goes and sits in a chair. The
[Guest]: health care professional utters two words, which in Hindi are, kya hai? OK, that's all,
[Guest]: which is what do you have? And the person says something about what symptoms that person
[Guest]: is suffering. The doctor scribbles a prescription, hands over the prescription. That's it. That's
[Guest]: all that happens by way of conversation and asks for some money. And this is it. This
[Guest]: is all health care interaction. So can we study these health care interactions? Do certain
[Guest]: kind of symptoms generate a different investigative tree on the part of the provider? Do certain
[Guest]: kind of patients go down a different investigative tree? If I speak in English with the doctor,
[Guest]: does the doctor treat me differently from if I speak in Marathi? OK, so these are all
[Guest]: the interesting questions to pursue that Jeff has always said to me that there are many
[Guest]: doctors in India who know a lot and they exercise their discretion and choose when to put their
[Guest]: knowledge into play. So it's not like the doctor is going to put full effort on every
[Guest]: single patient. The doctor has a notion that there is a patient where I'm just going to
[Guest]: spend two minutes and get 200 rupees and not really going to try. Whereas for certain patients,
[Guest]: I'm going to take more effort. And then finally, you get to the holy grail, which is that to
[Guest]: what extent did the visit to a health care professional make a marginal difference to
[Guest]: making the person better off? And that can be viewed in many different ways. As all of
[Guest]: us know, in a large fraction of problems, if you're just going to sit home and do absolutely
[Guest]: nothing, odds are you're going to get better. And under many, many circumstances, the human
[Guest]: just gets better. So you need to think about treatment and control where case one, the
[Guest]: person does absolutely nothing. Case two, the person goes to a health care provider.
[Guest]: Did you get better or did you get mis-prescribed some bad things? And did it actually do damage
[Guest]: to your life? And then finally, you go closer to the wellness question that to what extent
[Guest]: do episodes of health care create conditions for going towards higher wellness versus to
[Guest]: what extent do interactions with the health care business generate a mere medicalization?
[Guest]: So you just go back over and over and keep going through one bout of medicalization after
[Guest]: another. So this is a sort of flow perspective of thinking from the viewpoint of one household.
[Guest]: Think of all the things that they do and imagine in some dream world where we measure, measure,
[Guest]: measure, measure. And we think about how different kinds of health care establishments, different
[Guest]: kinds of tariff structures, presence of an insurance company as a counterweight in negotiating
[Guest]: power, does it change the behavior of the hospital and so on. So these are all the research
[Guest]: questions that can flow from this kind of detailed, comprehensive measurement.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. And I guess if this data is all publicly available, then what also happens
[Amit Varma]: is that entrepreneurs everywhere get a sense of which are the problems that need to be
[Amit Varma]: solved. And today we don't even have an adequate idea of that. So we have blunt tools for blunt
[Amit Varma]: problems and they might not achieve anything. The other strand I want to take up from what
[Amit Varma]: you said before was when you spoke about the necessity.
[Guest]: If I may just stay on that data subject, there is a lot of well-meaning philanthropy in India
[Guest]: where people try to do well. And the answer is that let me go build a free hospital or
[Guest]: let me go to underserved places like Bihar and run programs to do nutrition interventions
[Guest]: or vaccinations for kids. And I'll try to make kids in Bihar healthier. And in my opinion,
[Guest]: while these things mean well, they don't solve the problem. So the system is broken. And
[Guest]: the highest bang for the buck is in understanding the system, in building knowledge, and in
[Guest]: that long journey of the deeper transformation that is required. So I've seen lots of well-meaning
[Guest]: people put resourcing into these things and frankly just generate, work on the epiphenomena,
[Guest]: which it just feels good. So there is an instinctive and emotional thing that, oh, there's a person
[Guest]: who's feeling bad or there are so many million children dying in Uttar Pradesh and I want
[Guest]: to make a dent to the number of kids who are dying in Uttar Pradesh. I feel that it would
[Guest]: be more effective to be cold and to be intellectual and to build knowledge and to build a research
[Guest]: community because that's where we will get the deeper solutions and we will stop this
[Guest]: thing for life. Otherwise, there's a boat that's leaking and you're just bailing and
[Guest]: you're bailing and we're just not bailing enough to make a material difference. And
[Guest]: year after year, the Indian health system is getting more and more locked into horrible
[Guest]: incentives and don't underestimate the political economy problems of the incentives because
[Guest]: the malfunctioning heart surgeons of India have all the politicians of India on their
[Guest]: little black books. So they're an extremely effective lobby and when the country changes
[Guest]: in ways that question their privileges and income, they're going to lobby to change things
[Guest]: in their way. So every year that we go down this route of bad incentives, we actually
[Guest]: make things worse. So I feel that we really need to think more effectively in the world
[Guest]: of the well-meaning, generous, philanthropic people who are trying to put resourcing into
[Guest]: solving this problem. They need to step away from the instant rush of happiness that comes
[Guest]: from feeding one child to the more abstract conception of building knowledge and building
[Guest]: a research community and building greater thinking capabilities in this country because
[Guest]: in the end, that's the only way we're ever going to solve things. So let me for a moment,
[Amit Varma]: you know, leave the previous strand and I'll come back to that strand later before we pursue
[Amit Varma]: other strands, but take up this trend. And in this trend, let's move away from the abstract
[Amit Varma]: to the concrete. Let's say that a philanthropist comes to you tomorrow, maybe after listening
[Amit Varma]: to this episode and says that, oh, you know, I heard you in that episode and I want to
[Amit Varma]: give you $100 million to spend on health care as you will. And I was going to build hospitals
[Amit Varma]: in Bihar, but I have realized that that is giving a hungry man a fish. I want to teach
[Amit Varma]: him to fish. I mean, broadly, I just want to make the system work much better. So you,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay Shah, take my $100 million and spend it on improving health care in India. I don't
[Amit Varma]: care if you're playing the long game, have a 20 year span by all means, but use your
[Amit Varma]: wisdom and spend it. What are you doing with that $100 million?
[Guest]: All the things that I said from the beginning.
[Guest]: You said abstract things. Give me a few concrete things. I'll set up this, I'll set up that.
[Guest]: Build datasets, build research, build researchers, build community, build health policy thinking,
[Guest]: build health policy debate. One of the tragedies of this country is that we tend to assume
[Guest]: that a doctor thinks health policy. This is completely incorrect. A doctor knows how to
[Guest]: cut open my chest and perform surgery upon my heart, does not know how to think about
[Guest]: incentives, markets and systems. So we need to go down the route of building knowledge,
[Guest]: building research, building researchers, and also on some of the science and business models
[Guest]: around some of the innovations about telemedicine and AI and basically a nurse assisted system
[Guest]: which would be able to operate in remote places of India because we're not going to have enough
[Guest]: doctors for the foreseeable future. So this would be my thought process on the big problems
[Guest]: that require solving.
[Amit Varma]: So now to come back to my earlier strand where we were speaking about how if you have enough
[Amit Varma]: data entrepreneurs kind of know what holes in the market to fill or what problems to
[Amit Varma]: solve. And you also mentioned the necessity of having sophisticated buyers who understand
[Amit Varma]: what they're buying into and some of the symmetry of information goes. Now one way of doing
[Amit Varma]: this, as you said, is insurance companies, but there the incentives are also going in
[Amit Varma]: another direction and I don't know how that works out. And it strikes me that this is
[Amit Varma]: also a great market opportunity that entrepreneurs can look at this lack of sophisticated buyers
[Amit Varma]: or the lack that every individual would feel of a sophisticated buyer within herself and
[Amit Varma]: say that, okay, how do I kind of fill this gap? Do you think there's a gap like that?
[Amit Varma]: And what role do you think AI can have in filling that gap? Like one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: we've seen during COVID, one of the great tragedies, in fact, I mean, it's just so sad
[Amit Varma]: when the Twitter timeline is full of calls for plasma and remdesivir and we know that
[Amit Varma]: plasma does not work. And remdesivir basically does not work in the context of delaying fatalities
[Amit Varma]: or in serious cases at all. It's just a waste of time. And yet, you know, patients will
[Amit Varma]: go to doctors and say, Oh, what about plasma? What about remdesivir? Doctors will, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just go by the form and as I'm okay, fine, you know, to get the patients off their back.
[Amit Varma]: I've actually heard of people, relatives of patients contracting COVID because they've
[Amit Varma]: been running all around the city trying to get plasma and remdesivir. And this just seems
[Amit Varma]: so completely ridiculous. And you can't blame them because in that moment, in that chaos
[Amit Varma]: of emotion in the middle of Armageddon, as it were, when you could have an aged parent
[Amit Varma]: on oxygen and the doctors telling you get this, get that, in that moment, you can't
[Amit Varma]: expect sophistication. Is there a way where outside the current system, there is a disruptive
[Amit Varma]: way of coming in and solving for this problem? Maybe in the long run, you know, AI could
[Amit Varma]: be part of the puzzle. But you know, what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: So bottleneck is scale. Okay, so the entire Indian healthcare landscape is broken, particularly
[Guest]: in North India. Okay, so I want to use a word, which will set off alarm bells in the minds
[Guest]: of many people, but I want to use the word corruption. So when a doctor distorts her
[Guest]: professional judgment in return for some kickbacks, I call that corruption. And the entire business
[Guest]: model of individuals and organizations is rooted around these corrupt practices. It's
[Guest]: not easy for any one organization to change that. So imagine, you and I are going to set
[Guest]: up a brand new hospital, and we will have a different wage structure for the doctors
[Guest]: that we might hire. And we will say to the doctors, no kickbacks. Okay, and the quick
[Guest]: outcome will be no sensible profit maximizing doctor will want to join us. How do you overcome
[Guest]: that? Christian Medical College, well, it has solved that problem. Because they have
[Guest]: created an amazing history, a culture, a tradition. And they've managed to say this to a large
[Guest]: number of early stage doctors in their careers that look, if you have these kind of values,
[Guest]: come back and be with us. And that's how they have overcome the problem. But there is no
[Guest]: ready business model through which you can overcome this problem. By the way, we've seen
[Guest]: this exact same problem in finance. Okay, so in finance, we have that same pervasive
[Guest]: problem. Naciket Moore and Bindu Anand and others built a remarkable organization that
[Guest]: is called KGFS. Today, KGFS is significantly profitable. And they began going to remote
[Guest]: locations where there was not even a bank branch and performing basic financial services
[Guest]: for poor people. Okay, and it was great, more power to them. The trouble is, if you try
[Guest]: bringing that model to a city, and in the city, you're competing against hard driving
[Guest]: finance distributors, and finance salespeople who are being given kickbacks, how do you
[Guest]: compete with that and an organization where employees get salaries and employees don't
[Guest]: get kickbacks will not easily be able to compete against the kickback model until a lot goes
[Guest]: in in terms of getting the message to households that you really should not be dealing with
[Guest]: these toxic characters. Okay, so I used to do innumerable talks in finance, and I used
[Guest]: to always try to put in a public service announcement that please don't ever buy an insurance product
[Guest]: in India, because the entire business model of insurance is broken. And it took years
[Guest]: and years and years of that. But there have been significant improvements in the business
[Guest]: model of insurance companies, which were driven by the IRDA was driven by the state. So if
[Guest]: I make that analogy here, then we are up against a long slow battle that we'd need to build
[Guest]: some amount of, you know, medical malpractice law and tort law, and consumer protection
[Guest]: law and regulation of the behavior of medical persons. And the moment I say all this stuff,
[Guest]: I already start getting depressed. Because it is incredibly difficult to build this kind
[Guest]: of state capacity under Indian conditions. And in fact, we have failed in so many other
[Guest]: areas, that I don't think it's wise to recommend that toolkit for one more new area, it seems
[Guest]: to me we should fix it in the other areas. This is broken in all the other areas where
[Guest]: it's up and running. So, you know, I feel that the cutting edge, what one would say
[Guest]: to the philanthropist, the cutting edge of health policy is to make SEBI work better.
[Guest]: Because if one day we get to a SEBI that works, we'll be able to take elements of that law
[Guest]: and organization design and apply that to health.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, that makes sense that, you know, given state capacity, we haven't managed to
[Amit Varma]: get ABC right, we can hardly speak of XYZ or even Shakespeare's plays.
[Guest]: And, you know, I'm very mindful of the word state coercion. So much as I like to complain
[Guest]: about kickbacks and corruption, the fact is, when you bring a coercive creature called
[Guest]: the state that has pretty bad consequences of its own. So we should think 20 times before
[Guest]: we bring state violence into the relationship between a doctor and a patient. It has its
[Guest]: own bad consequences, it will have its own malfunction. So let's not be starry eyed
[Guest]: about what state intervention would do. So we're caught between these two bad worlds.
[Guest]: And our pathway for the coming years is to build knowledge, is to build research, is
[Guest]: to build researchers, is to build data sets, is to build a health policy community, which
[Guest]: is distinct and separate from doctors.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful. So, you know, we could really do a four, five, eight, 10 hour episode on talking
[Amit Varma]: about healthcare. But I guess the urgent sort of imperative of the moment is to talk more
[Amit Varma]: about the economics and politics of vaccination. And, you know, what's happening with that
[Amit Varma]: in this current moment. But let's let's take a quick commercial break. And then on the
[Amit Varma]: other side of the break, we'll get to the subject at hand.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want
[Amit Varma]: to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com. Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some
[Amit Varma]: of the best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags, pouches and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest
[Amit Varma]: modern Indian art at affordable prices. And artists get royalties for every product you
[Amit Varma]: buy win win game. The Indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses
[Amit Varma]: for women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmay Samanta,
[Amit Varma]: Manisha Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaydeep Mehrotra. Stay home but
[Amit Varma]: dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can
[Amit Varma]: show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors. Corporate
[Amit Varma]: gifting is also available. So head on over to Indian colors.com. There's colors with
[Amit Varma]: an OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right. Unseen for 15% off at Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Ajay Shah and now finally
[Amit Varma]: chatting about the subject of this episode, the economics and politics of vaccines. So
[Amit Varma]: you know, before we actually get to vaccines, like one final question to set context, in
[Amit Varma]: the last episode we did together on farm bills, of all things, you spoke about the difference
[Amit Varma]: between public health and healthcare. And I think that's a difference, again, worth
[Amit Varma]: underscoring as a kind of context for our listeners. So can you can you tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about how significant understanding that difference is for being actually able to grapple
[Guest]: with this problem? Public health is about actions that operate
[Guest]: on a population. Healthcare is about actions that operate on an individual. For example,
[Guest]: public health is fixing the air quality of North India. And healthcare is fixing the
[Guest]: respiratory illness of one person. Public health is about prevention. Healthcare is
[Guest]: about cure. Public health tends to generate public goods, which are non rival and non
[Guest]: excludable. Healthcare tends to be about private goods, which are excludable and rival. So
[Guest]: public health and healthcare are two different worlds in the story of the field of health.
[Amit Varma]: Perfect. You know, you sent me an excellent paper that you'd written for the NCAER in
[Amit Varma]: July last year, which I found quite clear headed in thinking about vaccines. And there
[Amit Varma]: you asked five questions about vaccines, which are, you know, sort of an interesting way
[Amit Varma]: to set a frame for what was the problem that we faced at that time. It seems like distant
[Amit Varma]: history now July 2020. When was that even? Take me through the thinking about vaccines
[Amit Varma]: at that point. By July, we kind of realized that there will be vaccines at some point,
[Amit Varma]: though there were many skeptics who were saying, oh, there will never be a vaccine. There has
[Amit Varma]: never been a vaccine for a coronavirus. But at some point, we kind of realized that there
[Amit Varma]: will be vaccines and it's kind of been miraculous how there actually are so many and that's
[Amit Varma]: crazy. But then the problem comes, what do we do with them? How do we vaccinate our population?
[Amit Varma]: Take me through the different nuances of the questions you need to ask at that point.
[Guest]: We would have to think about the extent to which a vaccine is useful and required in
[Guest]: changing the disease dynamics. We would have to think about any prioritization questions
[Guest]: that to what extent would a pure private market work? To what extent is there a role for a
[Guest]: state and is there a role for some kinds of prioritization? We would need to think about
[Guest]: the operational and institutional mechanisms on how to get vaccines out on scale. We'd
[Guest]: need to think about defining success, that at what point do you stop? Do you just keep
[Guest]: going? And in all this, I want to add one thing which is on my mind today, which was
[Guest]: not at the time of writing that article, which is, are we facing a one-off in the context
[Guest]: of SARS-CoV-2 that we saw in 2020? Or are we thinking of something that is going to
[Guest]: be with us for a while in a more general sense of adults, epidemics, and vaccines? So today,
[Guest]: my thinking is much more in favor of, this is something that is going to be with us in
[Guest]: steady state, that vaccines and vaccination of adults is an important dimension of the
[Guest]: Indian health system. And so we need to find long-term, stable, sustainable solutions,
[Guest]: and not just think about it as a one campaign to solve one problem of one pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: And you've kind of also discussed in another presentation you made later, which I'll also
[Amit Varma]: link from the show notes, where you've looked at previous pandemics, and you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, for example, how the challenges that we were facing were different from, say, smallpox.
[Amit Varma]: And smallpox, obviously, was a population scale success story. But we didn't require
[Amit Varma]: a cold chain. The timescales were different. We could do it over a period of a few years.
[Amit Varma]: Testing was far easier because people were symptomatic. You just had to look at someone
[Amit Varma]: to know if they got it. And it kind of worked. And similar attempts on malaria and polio
[Amit Varma]: had much more mixed results. So give me a sense of the challenges that we kind of faced
[Amit Varma]: in sort of rolling out this whole program at the start. What were the challenges when
[Amit Varma]: it came to administrative capacity? What were the challenges when it came to the actual
[Amit Varma]: states where it would be administered? Give me a sense of some of these constraints. And
[Amit Varma]: this is obviously just one aspect of it. I mean, there are two ways to get all of this
[Amit Varma]: done. One is that the state kind of does everything. And the other is that, you know, the state
[Amit Varma]: does whatever it can, but you let private players also function. And we'll discuss those
[Amit Varma]: different approaches and sort of their implications after this. But just looking at the state
[Amit Varma]: for the moment, what are we really facing? Like, we are facing a state which not only
[Amit Varma]: has severe constraints, but very often, one of those constraints is an intellectual constraint
[Amit Varma]: where it doesn't even understand that there are constraints. And it doesn't even understand
[Amit Varma]: the scope of the task which is being undertaken, so to say. So as someone who's almost been
[Amit Varma]: part of the state who's worked with the state for over 20 years, when you sit down and you
[Amit Varma]: look at the scale of this, what are the pain points which really begin to worry you where
[Amit Varma]: you sort of sit back and, you know, wonder how it's going to happen at all?
[Guest]: I talked about smallpox in that NCEER talk, which is going to turn into a paper soon.
[Guest]: Because for me from childhood, that was just like one of the most glorious moments in world
[Guest]: history and India's history. Can you imagine a more horrendous disease than smallpox with
[Guest]: something with a case fatality rate like 25%? And where you are able to vaccinate everybody
[Guest]: in the country against it, and where what we achieved as the human race was eradication.
[Guest]: This is like the highest dream that could ever be sought after. And whenever anybody
[Guest]: in India dreams vaccination, and you think big, you dream of the smallpox episode. And
[Guest]: yet the moment you start going down this route, there are so many differences that are holding
[Guest]: us back today. As you were checklisting, the smallpox campaign was done over many, many
[Guest]: years. It was not done in a short time. For whatever reason, today in the modern world,
[Guest]: we had to finish with the COVID-19 pandemic quickly. We don't have the choice of saying
[Guest]: we'll take five years over it. The smallpox campaign involved a heat stable vaccine. And
[Guest]: there was no difficulty of a cold chain. You could easily transport it to any corner of
[Guest]: the country. In the smallpox story, there was not this complexity of asymptomatic people.
[Guest]: So you really had to glance at the face of a person and you knew that they were sick.
[Guest]: And so then you would put a ring around that population and go after it. So it was a more
[Guest]: trace test, isolate kind of approach that was applied to keep finding pockets of smallpox
[Guest]: and getting them under control. And you would also suspect that all in all, the state capacity
[Guest]: of the Republic of India in the 70s was significantly superior to what we have today. That's a non-obvious
[Amit Varma]: proposition.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you say that? That is non-obvious.
[Guest]: We tend to think that because GDP is higher, state capacity is higher. GDP is higher because
[Guest]: there's more capital, there's more technology, there's more labor, the firms are more sophisticated.
[Guest]: But if you think of the ability of an Indian state in the early 70s to make up its mind
[Guest]: to collaborate with a WHO, have 50 overseas experts be living here in India, collaborating,
[Guest]: participating and running a campaign all across the country to eradicate smallpox. My opinion
[Guest]: is that no, today we can't do it. We don't have that capability in the Indian bureaucracy
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: Why? Why have we degraded? Is it a natural degradation that you'd expect given the nature
[Amit Varma]: of bureaucracy and the way things play out and all of that?
[Guest]: No, it's not the natural degradation. I remain an optimistic person. And I think that the
[Guest]: natural trajectory of the world is that we learn and things get better. But I think that
[Guest]: over these decades, the Indian state has become swamped by so many challenges. And there were
[Guest]: elements of the working of the Indian state that were not institutionalized. So it worked
[Guest]: in the hands of a certain kind of person. And it doesn't work in the hands of different
[Guest]: people. So we didn't build it out as an institution. So the way things work today are very different
[Guest]: from the way things worked in the 70s.
[Guest]: By the way, if you have some good conversations with people in the army, and you ask them,
[Guest]: could you do a 1971 campaign in Bangladesh today, they would offer you lots of concerns
[Guest]: that what was done in 71 was just outrageously great. But that level of operational capability,
[Guest]: confidence, competence, logistics, decision making, it is harder and harder to find that
[Guest]: today in the Indian state. So I think that there's a deeper decline of capability that
[Guest]: has been going on in the Indian state. And many of us, we tend to jump to the conclusion
[Guest]: that because the GDP is higher, the state capacity must be higher. I think that there
[Guest]: are many ways in which that's not true. There is a book which is called Building State Capacity
[Guest]: by Lan Pritchett and co-authors. They have a measure of state capacity in that book.
[Guest]: And going by their measurement, they find that from the mid 90s to the middle 2010s,
[Guest]: in India's case, the state capacity actually got worse, and better while the GDP grew greatly.
[Guest]: So I think all of us need to decompose our minds that you have a firm like Infosys, it's
[Guest]: a great firm, they make GDP, it's fabulous. That doesn't mean that the Indian state is
[Amit Varma]: better.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, fascinating. So, you know, one of the episodes of the scene in the unseen, which
[Amit Varma]: has been a gateway drug for many people, it's not even one of the top 25 episodes of the
[Amit Varma]: show in terms of downloads. But as a gateway drug, it remains huge is an episode I did
[Amit Varma]: with Srinath Raghavan on the 1971 war to free Bangladesh and has stunning insights on what
[Amit Varma]: really went on there. But my question is on the why. So let's say I'll take your word
[Amit Varma]: for it that okay, as far as the what is concerned, fine, the state degraded, but why did it degrade?
[Amit Varma]: Like, of course, I agree with the contention that ideally, you want institutions where
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't matter who the individuals are, whether they are good people or bad people,
[Amit Varma]: the institutions are robust enough that everything just works. And bad or good individuals only
[Amit Varma]: make a difference on the margins. One, I don't think we ever had that. And two, assuming
[Amit Varma]: that our institutions have degraded and state capacity has degraded. Do you have any, what
[Amit Varma]: are your hypothesis on the why of that? Why did that happen? Like, I'm just trying to
[Amit Varma]: understand it structurally.
[Guest]: So we came out of colonial rule, which was not democratic rule. And it was based on a
[Guest]: certain conception of some ruling class. And we basically switched around that ruling class
[Guest]: class. And there was a new Indian National Congress, and there was a new Indian Civil
[Guest]: Service come IAS, and they became the new ruling class. The Indian population was relatively
[Guest]: small, the Indian GDP was relatively small, the demands made upon the Indian state were
[Guest]: relatively small. So in the early years, that combination of autocratic rule, modest population
[Guest]: and modest objectives of the state delivered a certain level of state competence and state
[Guest]: capacity. And then as the years went by, the Indian state got overrun with a larger and
[Guest]: larger number of demands. The scope of the attempts at welfarism today are of a different
[Guest]: order altogether. Adjacent institutions corroded. So what was supposed to be a co-equal balancing
[Guest]: act between an executive and a legislature and a judiciary, tended to break down and
[Guest]: we became more of an administrative state. And the simple INC domination went away. So
[Guest]: now you have a complicated political landscape, where there are many different political parties.
[Guest]: And then the nature of the conversation between the political leadership and the executive
[Guest]: changed. It was no longer the case that the executive was working with just the Congress
[Guest]: for long periods of time. Now it became complicated that this executive, this bureaucrat is friendly
[Guest]: with this party, this bureaucrat is friendly with this party. So you start getting destruction
[Guest]: of institutional memory each time a new political party comes into power. We are unable to manage
[Guest]: knowledge and insights across long periods of time. So all these pieces, they come together.
[Guest]: There's also a new character of the people that are going into civil service today. In
[Guest]: 1947, some of the best people in India thought that becoming an employee of the government
[Guest]: was pretty cool, partly out of the nobility and the morale of Gandhiji and Nehru and partly
[Guest]: out of simple economic considerations, because those were relatively well paid jobs. Today,
[Guest]: it's more or less upside down on both counts. So there is a qualitative change in the nature
[Guest]: of the people that we meet. I have been in policy discussions for the longest time. And
[Guest]: it's not very inspiring the quality in the room that you get in many policy discussions
[Guest]: today. And my subjective opinion is that when I was very young, and there were people in
[Guest]: the room that I used to look up to, I thought that they ran better policy discussions. When
[Guest]: I was the youngest person in the room and least important person in the room. I used
[Guest]: to admire the quality of the conversation that used to take place.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fair enough. I mean, one never wants to be the smartest person in the room. That's
[Amit Varma]: not a good situation to be in a number of stands. And I'll get a little discursive here.
[Amit Varma]: And I promise the listeners, I'll come back to vaccines. But all of this is kind of fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and just getting that deeper bedrock of understanding of what's going on. And this is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the degradation of the Indian state, as you mentioned, it is a kind of an interesting
[Amit Varma]: new thing that I need to think about. One, you mentioned colonialism, and it was just
[Amit Varma]: like I was just thinking today, that in a sense, the Indian state's abdication in the
[Amit Varma]: face of this current crisis is similar to what our British colonial masters were often
[Amit Varma]: accused of. And it came to the various famines that happened through the centuries, where
[Amit Varma]: you had a natural disaster, and it was completely either ignored or even exacerbated by the
[Amit Varma]: callous apathetic reaction of the colonial masters, who were in who would, in fact, quite
[Amit Varma]: often just denied that there was a problem at all. And we've kind of seen that play out
[Amit Varma]: and we see that play out again. And I keep talking about how, you know, we didn't actually
[Amit Varma]: gain true independence in that sense. In 47, we merely passed over an oppressive colonial
[Amit Varma]: state from a set of white-skinned rulers to a set of brown-skinned rulers, only the colour
[Amit Varma]: changed, the essential nature stayed the same. The other interesting aspect, I was going
[Amit Varma]: to talk to you about fundamentally coercive nature of the state. And the thing is, when
[Amit Varma]: we talk about the coercive nature of the state, it seems to imply that there is a non-coercive
[Amit Varma]: nature as well, which of course is not the case. Everything the state does is coercive.
[Guest]: And the only question is what? I think the interesting distinction is undemocratic coercion
[Guest]: versus democratic legitimacy. I think that's the interesting line, that what we aspire
[Guest]: to as a republic is the legitimacy of coercion that is channelled in an ethical and just
[Guest]: fashion, as opposed to the rule of a few people that's an oligarchy where there is absolute
[Amit Varma]: power with a few people. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I was finishing my thought by sort of expressing
[Amit Varma]: something along those lines, which is that everything the state does is coercive, except
[Amit Varma]: that we need the state and some of that coercion is justified. And all ideology really falls
[Amit Varma]: down on the margins. Where do you draw that line? And where do you decide what coercion
[Amit Varma]: is justified and what is not? And obviously, in a democracy as well, the question of legitimacy
[Amit Varma]: comes up. But speaking of coercion, and you used that phrase many times in both your wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book with Vijay Kelkar and in your recent articles on this current crisis, and it reminded
[Amit Varma]: me of Adam Smith's Man of System. And I'll just read this passage out for my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: This is from the Theory of Moral Sentiments. And there he writes, and you'll find this
[Amit Varma]: person recognisable. In that he writes, quote, the man of system is apt to be very wise in
[Amit Varma]: his own conceit, and is often so enamoured with the supposed beauty of his ideal plan
[Amit Varma]: of government, that he cannot suffer the smallest deviation from any part of it. He goes on
[Amit Varma]: to establish it completely and in all its parts, without any regard either to the great
[Amit Varma]: interests or to the strong prejudices which may oppose it. He seems to imagine that he
[Amit Varma]: can arrange the different members of a great society with as much ease as a hand arranges
[Amit Varma]: the different pieces upon a chessboard. He does not consider that the pieces upon the
[Amit Varma]: chessboard have no other principle of motion besides that which the hand impresses upon
[Amit Varma]: them, but that in the great chessboard of human society, every single piece has a principle
[Amit Varma]: of motion of its own, altogether different from that which the legislature might choose
[Amit Varma]: to impress upon it, stop quote, a sort of version of what Hayek called the fatal conceit.
[Amit Varma]: And we see that our founders in a sense, or at least the influential founders were men
[Amit Varma]: of system, which is why we have all the central planning, the state is going to do everything.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out that it's a much more manageable task in the early years compared
[Amit Varma]: to what it later became. So I'd assume that that's sort of one aspect of it that if you
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, if you think like a man of system, you just have less chess pieces to
[Amit Varma]: move and less things going wrong, whereas in this globalized world, there are so many
[Amit Varma]: influences.
[Guest]: There's a distinction we should make between a Lenin and a Stalin versus a Putin. Okay,
[Guest]: so in a Lenin and a Stalin, there is this grand design. You may disagree with that grand
[Guest]: design. There is a grand design and there is an extreme ideological willingness to inflict
[Guest]: cruelty upon the people, because I know I am right and I am going to build that grand
[Guest]: design. So why did Stalin do collectivization? It made no sense for him in any pragmatic
[Guest]: sphere, but he was an ideologue. He was not just an ordinary tin pot dictator. So that's
[Guest]: the distinction that there is an ideologue who sees a dream and pursue some utopian ideal.
[Guest]: And you and I would challenge the capability and legitimacy of anybody who tries to tell
[Guest]: us to live our lives going by their utopian ideal, but that's a separate point. But there
[Guest]: is intellectual approach of a Lenin and a Trotsky and a Stalin, which has a certain
[Guest]: kind of barbarism and a certain kind of consequence in terms of transforming society, because
[Guest]: the fact remains that the USSR went from a semi-Asiatic society in 1917 to the world's
[Guest]: greatest land power in 1945. So something transformative happened at a horrendous human
[Guest]: cost. And then you get to Vladimir Putin, who's really just all apparatchik and no philosophy.
[Guest]: So Putin has no idea about what is the design of the world, but it's just a game of power.
[Guest]: The only game is that he and a few others would like to concentrate power upon themselves,
[Guest]: would like to constantly identify anybody else who commands influence and destroy them.
[Guest]: And that creates the silence of a graveyard of a different nature. So it's interesting
[Guest]: to look at the world from this lens that there are the central planners who have some dream
[Guest]: world and often lead their world into ruin. And that's Pol Pot. He was a visionary that
[Guest]: led the country to the ruin. Or Mao. And then there are just elementary Marcos who are just
[Guest]: ordinary tin pot dictators, where it's just a game of always and always accumulating power,
[Guest]: grabbing power, monopolizing power, and shutting off every other energy and thinking and disagreement
[Guest]: in the economy. And I think these are two different kinds of pathologies to wonder about.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very fine nuance. And it strikes me that obviously, one, I think our current
[Amit Varma]: rulers and I'll use the term rulers because I think we are more subjects and citizens
[Amit Varma]: away this country is today. Our current rulers are more in the Putin mold. I'd add to that
[Amit Varma]: and say that, you know, the obsession of say Modi and Shah is not so much governance as
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine it should be in a democracy, because how else do you win elections, but
[Amit Varma]: is winning elections, which has nothing to do with governance, actually, it's all about
[Amit Varma]: narrative building. So they are all the time focused on elections and narrative building.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what it's all about. And they can control that. And what the reality is doesn't
[Amit Varma]: matter as long as you can weave a story around it. And the other thing here that strikes
[Amit Varma]: me is that, listen, you can win elections with central planning. You know, what Amit
[Amit Varma]: Shah did, in fact, as a campaign manager in 2014, is a staggering feat of management,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of reconfiguring all those caste vote banks, through UP, Maharashtra, everywhere,
[Amit Varma]: what they did, I mean, I had an episode on that with Prashant Jha as well, who wrote
[Amit Varma]: the book, How the BJP wins, staggering piece centrally done, but you can do that at the
[Amit Varma]: level of a, you know, controlling a party, you can do that at the level of controlling a country
[Amit Varma]: can't really plan things centrally. And you could argue that at one level, their intensity
[Amit Varma]: of effort never quite went into governing as much as elections, because the two really
[Amit Varma]: aren't related. And, you know, unless things get really bad, and you just want to win the
[Amit Varma]: election and control the narrative.
[Guest]: Just another interpretation. Imagine central planning and top down management being applied
[Guest]: into both pathways with equal zeal and vigour.
[Amit Varma]: But incentives because
[Guest]: It just delivers better results in one than the other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because the party is a manageable beast, a country is not, it's just too many pieces
[Amit Varma]: on the chessboard, as it were to go back to Smith's Man of System analogy, which is why,
[Amit Varma]: you know, something like, for example, if the same zeal had gone into rolling out vaccinations
[Amit Varma]: late last year, we would honestly not be in that situation right now, the situation that
[Amit Varma]: we are in, I think that's part of the issue. And part of the other issue is that even that
[Amit Varma]: would only solve part of the problem, that this whole Man of System approach central
[Amit Varma]: planning top down approach wasn't sufficient, as you have pointed out that they were, you
[Amit Varma]: know, different approaches you could take with vaccinations, you know, only one approach
[Amit Varma]: was the state does everything. And there, of course, it didn't do enough. But the other
[Amit Varma]: approach also was that you harness private enterprise, and you also side by side, allow
[Amit Varma]: them to kind of work with you. But maybe I'm kind of shifting ahead in the narrative. But
[Amit Varma]: these are the two broad policy choices that policymakers face, right? So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about what this choice was like. And was it inevitable that in our culture of top down
[Amit Varma]: central planning, state does it, the state controls everything kind of thinking that
[Amit Varma]: we would just say ki nahi state karega, and, you know, our subjects will line up and take
[Amit Varma]: the vaccines when their turn comes. And we won't allow private players in here. What
[Amit Varma]: was the sort of thinking like what were the pulls and pressures?
[Guest]: So in countries like Israel, and the US and the UK, the central government equivalents
[Guest]: took charge and built large scale vaccine rollouts. Okay, and regardless of what you
[Guest]: may think, or I may think, those things by and large work. Okay, so they had their critics,
[Guest]: they had their problems. Every centrally planned system has its own complexities. Let me give
[Guest]: you an example. Every centrally planned system will have a bright line rule, like, we will
[Guest]: do above age 45, we will not do below age 45. Whereas actually, what you need is far
[Guest]: more nuance. What are your comorbidities? What is your social life? Does your occupation
[Guest]: involve meeting more people or less people? So any simplistic bright line rule will do
[Guest]: badly. Whereas if people make more decisions for themselves, they'll do better. So you
[Guest]: can and should criticize every centrally planned system. Similarly, in the United States, what
[Guest]: is appearing to be a central system actually involves contracting with private people and
[Guest]: getting the job done in what you might see is a remarkable feat of government activism.
[Guest]: So first, the government played a role in funding research and funding manufacturing
[Guest]: by vaccine manufacturers. At a time when there were risks, the government could have come
[Guest]: out blank with that money wasted and no vaccine. So they had the government systems that had
[Guest]: the capability to not stand back, to not wait for private people to bear the risk, but rather
[Guest]: to put up risk capital and say, here, we're funding research, or here, I'm giving you
[Guest]: an advanced purchase contract, so that a lot of work on vaccine research and vaccine manufacturing
[Guest]: got done ahead of time. So that was the first milestone of what the United States government
[Guest]: did right. And then, barring a few missteps, which got fixed along the way, it has worked
[Guest]: out into a pretty private sector system. So the United States government enters into contract
[Guest]: with Pfizer. Then the United States government has a contract with UPS to do the cryogenic
[Guest]: transportation from Pfizer's factories to the Walgreen and CVS shops on the roadside,
[Guest]: who are also private. And the United States government has a contract with the Walgreen
[Guest]: and the CVS to push vaccine into the arms of people. And then the United States government
[Guest]: has a mechanism to reach out to various people and say, it's your turn to set up a booking
[Guest]: system, a reservation system. So the point is that there was energy in their country
[Guest]: for cryogenic transportation, for vaccine R&D, for vaccine manufacturing, and for the
[Guest]: last mile vaccination in the private sector. All this energy was harnessed in a collection
[Guest]: of contracts, and that's how they did it. But right now, I just want to harp on one
[Guest]: point, which is nothing succeeds like success. The bottom line is that the highly centralized
[Guest]: approaches of the US and the UK and countries like Israel have worked. They have delivered.
[Guest]: I respect those countries. I respect the policy choices, because the bottom line is, it worked.
[Guest]: And if hypothetically, in India, we had similar levels of state capability, then I would not
[Guest]: be so stuck on ideology. So what I was writing and arguing in late 2020 was a practical point,
[Guest]: was a pragmatic point, that look back at smallpox, look back at the glory of the Indian state
[Guest]: that was able to eradicate smallpox in five years under higher levels of state capacity.
[Guest]: And now compare that against where we are today. And do you think you'd be able to pull
[Guest]: this off? Okay, so here's a counterpoint. There are some 25 million infants who are
[Guest]: born in India every day, and a somewhat larger number of mothers. And ever since independence,
[Guest]: there has been an attempt to try to bring down the maternal mortality rate and the infant
[Guest]: mortality rate by getting vaccines out to mothers and infants. And as of today, the
[Guest]: coverage is like 60-80%. So at the end of all these years, we don't have a comprehensive
[Guest]: success with a small problem of 25 million infants. And my first law of management, my
[Guest]: first law of public administration is that if you don't know how to do a 25 million problem
[Guest]: today, odds are you will not succeed on a 50 million problem tomorrow. And what was
[Guest]: needed was a 500 million or a 1 billion problem. My argument last year was that this is a problem
[Guest]: size that will elude the Indian. Now, let me turn away from the public administration
[Guest]: problem to more fundamental economics of a vaccine. If we had to think from scratch,
[Guest]: do we really need a lot of state in the vaccine? And the answer is not a whole lot. Because
[Guest]: there is a substantial sense in which a vaccine is not a public good. A vaccine falls under
[Guest]: health care. It's not under public health. Why do I say that? A public good is something
[Guest]: that is non-rival and non-excludable. A vaccine is rival and excludable. If I get a dose of
[Guest]: vaccine, that particular dose is not available to you. And I can't shut off access to a newborn
[Guest]: child of the vaccine. So, a vaccine is absolutely a private good. There is a market failure
[Guest]: and that market failure is an externality. What is going on is that when I get vaccinated,
[Guest]: I impose some benefits upon you. Because when you and I have a social interaction, the disease
[Guest]: is less likely to come to you because I am involved. Because each person that gets a
[Guest]: vaccine imposes a certain amount of benefits upon bystanders. Now, the overall gains to
[Guest]: society when I get vaccinated are higher than my personal gains for myself. So, as with
[Guest]: other classic positive externality problems, such as education, we have a mismatch between
[Guest]: the individual incentive and the incentives of society. The individual is likely to under
[Guest]: invest in vaccination. So, some people have enough private interest that they will pay
[Guest]: the price of vaccination and they will do it for themselves. Some others might not,
[Guest]: because their personal incentives are not strong enough to pay for it on their own steam
[Guest]: and they don't give a damn about what's happening to everybody else. And there is a role for
[Guest]: state intervention potentially to change that. So, that's the market failure perspective
[Guest]: on vaccines.
[Guest]: The third and epidemiological perspective on vaccines teaches us that you actually don't
[Guest]: need every single person in the country to be vaccinated. You only need enough people
[Guest]: vaccinated to change the disease dynamics. So, we should always think of a combination
[Guest]: of people developing resistance to a disease. You can either get sick and get immune or
[Guest]: you can get vaccinated. But in either path, what happens is that at the end of it, generally,
[Guest]: you are now protected and you are no longer available for the spread of the disease. So,
[Guest]: we should always think that there are two highways where people are riding on. Some
[Guest]: people are getting sick and thereby getting immune. Some people are getting vaccinated
[Guest]: and thereby getting immune. And when the two add up to something like 70, 80% of the population,
[Guest]: the basic mathematics of the disease changes and the disease rapidly dies away until a
[Guest]: new variant comes along. And I will come back to new variants later in the conversation
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: So, in this full picture, what we need to think is that, case one, could we do a highly
[Guest]: state-led program to push up to herd immunity? Probably, that is not a very feasible path
[Guest]: under Indian conditions. Point two, do we even need a completely state-driven program
[Guest]: based on first principles, public economics, and public health reasoning about this problem?
[Guest]: The answer is no. There is a private good with an externality. Whenever a person like
[Guest]: you or I is able to pay 5,000 rupees and get the vaccine done, it is the perfect answer.
[Guest]: There is nothing wrong with it. The more people that get it, the better because you are reducing
[Guest]: the susceptibles. And also, the third point is to recognize that the very spread of the
[Guest]: disease is actually reducing the mass of the people that need vaccination. The current
[Guest]: clinical guidelines are that if you have got sick once, you need one dose of Covishield
[Guest]: and not two. And that has a huge impact on the arithmetic of doses. Everybody is counting
[Guest]: 1.4 billion people multiplied by two is 2.8 billion doses. That is not a correct calculation,
[Guest]: partly because you do not need to cover 100%, partly because for everybody that gets sick,
[Guest]: you do not need two doses, you need just one, and partly because while the program is running
[Guest]: and is on its path to completion, the differential equations are going to change their behavior
[Guest]: and the epidemic is just going to abruptly vanish like Donald Trump promised us many
[Amit Varma]: years ago. So a bunch of things that I want to kind of unpack there. You know, one fundamental
[Amit Varma]: aspect of this, which is what is the role of the state. Now, even someone who supports
[Amit Varma]: free markets like me and believes the state should not be in most things just through
[Amit Varma]: the rule of law would say that there are certain things the state must do where we need the
[Amit Varma]: state. Most libertarians also would say that you need a minimum government that among other
[Amit Varma]: things can fight wars, can save you from invaders outside. And my question really here is that
[Amit Varma]: we are at war with this virus, you know, it's not Pakistan or China or whatever, but we
[Amit Varma]: are at war with this virus. And therefore, you know, if the state is there to protect
[Amit Varma]: our rights, which is, you know, the fundamental reason for it to exist in the first place,
[Amit Varma]: it has to protect our lives, it has to take care of this aspect of things. Now, the problem
[Amit Varma]: here is that state capacity, as you've pointed out, is far better in the Western countries.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you look at the way the American government responded, I think aspects of it
[Amit Varma]: are just outstanding. For example, what they did in the middle of last year, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: was you know, they made deals with companies who were working on vaccines, giving them
[Amit Varma]: advance orders, giving them grants, giving them money, therefore incentivizing them to
[Amit Varma]: keep going. It was not conditional upon whether the vaccine will work or this will whatever,
[Amit Varma]: it was just that we'll throw money at the problem, you build your capacity, you carry
[Amit Varma]: out whatever, let money not be a constraint, we are there, we'll spend the money. And that's
[Amit Varma]: absolutely necessary. In this case, you know, you need a government that, you know, they
[Amit Varma]: were wise enough to realize that you spend billions today to save trillions, because
[Amit Varma]: that is the cost to the economy, which is why, you know, it's completely fundamental
[Amit Varma]: to me that anyone who wants a free vaccine in India should be able to get it, they should
[Amit Varma]: not even be up for debate. Now, the issue here is when it comes to India is that our
[Amit Varma]: state capacity is abysmal, and that has consequences. Now, you've also pointed out that in the case
[Amit Varma]: of testing, where initially the state said, Hey, we will do everything, no private testing.
[Amit Varma]: And because of that testing was much slower than it should have been, data was worse than
[Amit Varma]: it should have been. And a spillover effect of that possibly was because of lack of adequate
[Amit Varma]: data, we underestimated how bad the second wave would be and what we needed to do to
[Amit Varma]: prepare. And once you had private testing come into play, things became much better.
[Amit Varma]: So the state capacity simply wasn't there. So this is not an either or situation, what
[Amit Varma]: people like you and you know, I wrote about it back at the time, you know, Shruti, Mihir,
[Amit Varma]: all of them were writing about it, what you really need is that the government goes on
[Amit Varma]: a war footing. And I use that phrase, with some thought behind it goes on a war footing
[Amit Varma]: against a virus and tries to vaccinate as many people as it can. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: you enable the private sector to do what it will import whatever vaccines it has to, and
[Amit Varma]: also get to work. One of the interesting nuances you pointed out there is that when the state
[Amit Varma]: is doing something, it will have these blunt heuristics that okay, who do we vaccinate
[Amit Varma]: first, the elderly are the most so first over 60, then over 45. And I was chatting the other
[Amit Varma]: day with our mutual friend Ruben Abraham, who threw the question that who should we
[Amit Varma]: vaccinate first, the vulnerable or the spreaders, the people most likely to spread. And if there
[Amit Varma]: is also a case to be made that he it's a spreaders who we need vaccinate as soon as possible,
[Amit Varma]: how do you get it done? If you are to make the case that, you know, people in the slums
[Amit Varma]: might already have some level of seroprevalence, and they've already got it as people in the
[Amit Varma]: high rises, the elites, who are now in fact, suffering the brunt of the second wave, who
[Amit Varma]: need to be protected, how do you do it? And the answer there is that you let them buy
[Amit Varma]: it, you let private providers get into play, companies will provide it for their employees,
[Amit Varma]: like you pointed out in one of your articles that why would an airline not say that all
[Amit Varma]: my frequent flyers will vaccinate them? You know, why would a cooperative housing society,
[Amit Varma]: which is today organising groceries at particular times during the lockdown, not say that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: we'll do a vaccine drive. And, and that never happened. And that is just so incredibly short
[Amit Varma]: sighted and sort of bizarre. Would you like to add to this?
[Guest]: So I feel that from the viewpoint of public health, in some ideal world, we would say
[Guest]: that it is our objective to put an end to this pandemic. And so we need to push hard
[Guest]: on vaccination till the point where the disease dynamics changes and it will go away with
[Guest]: a whimper. So I agree with you completely on that. Whether you think about this in terms
[Guest]: of the justice and protecting the people and protecting rich and poor alike, or you think
[Guest]: about this in terms of a pragmatic viewpoint saying, we're losing trillions of rupees in
[Guest]: this rubbish. And we should be willing to commit resources in order to solve this. So
[Guest]: I'm completely with you on this. I feel that where we went wrong in India was on a couple
[Guest]: of bottlenecks. The first was that somehow, and I have really not been able to understand
[Guest]: where this comes from. Somehow, the health policy community in India has accumulated
[Guest]: an idea that we must never import vaccines. So I don't know why. For the life of me, I'm
[Guest]: not able to understand. We import mobile phones, we import wristwatches, we import food, we
[Guest]: import clothes, we import everything under the sun today. But an old Nehruvian hostility
[Guest]: to import of vaccines is the order of the day when it comes to health policy people.
[Guest]: And it has proved to be an extremely costly blind spot. Things are so bad that I believe
[Guest]: there was an example, there was a situation where a global vaccine provider, who has been
[Guest]: greenlighted by drug safety authorities in many OECD countries, was actually denied permission
[Guest]: in India on the grounds that their product is not safe. Now that doesn't make any sense.
[Guest]: So first of all, we have no great drug safety procedures in India to speak of. There's all
[Guest]: kinds of stuff that gets through. And, you know, it's not like we are more stringent
[Guest]: and that we run higher standards than what I've seen in some other countries. And yet,
[Guest]: was it some hostility to import of vaccines, where we actually closed the door on, I forget
[Guest]: the name, some foreign vaccine, just a couple of months ago, this little drama took place.
[Amit Varma]: So I think last year in October or something, Pfizer actually tried to come into India and
[Amit Varma]: the Indian government said, no, you have to do trials first. And they were like, forget
[Guest]: it, let's just go. So there is one, there's some blinkers in the field of health policy.
[Guest]: And this goes back to, you know, what I was saying earlier, that what we lack in India
[Guest]: is a health research community. We lack a health policy community. We've just got amateurs.
[Guest]: I mean, they're doctors. I want those people to cut open my ribcage when I have a heart
[Guest]: attack, but I don't want them to do health policy. This is a serious problem.
[Amit Varma]: Trust me, after listening to this, they want to cut open your ribcage right now.
[Guest]: So there were certain blind spots on these kinds of questions. The second idea was that
[Guest]: I feel for too many people in India, in the policy process, there is not the elementary
[Guest]: care around state coercion. So for our thinking in public policy, we baseline on freedom.
[Guest]: Our default setting is every human being is free and we should do as we like. And then
[Guest]: we checklist the nature of state coercion, that this is banned, this is banned, this
[Guest]: is banned. These are all the ways in which the state is coercing us. And we wonder why
[Guest]: do you have that coercion? Why do you have that coercion? Is there a market failure?
[Guest]: Is this an effective coercion? Whereas what happened with the Indian state on vaccination
[Guest]: was that there was a whole array of state coercion that was put into place without thinking
[Guest]: too much about whether that is justified or legitimate. And that may be the DNA of the
[Guest]: Indian state in many, many things. Maybe this is actually how things are being done all
[Guest]: across the place.
[Guest]: So the lack of application of mind before coercing private people, I feel is what was
[Guest]: at fault. So almost without noticing it, there would be some junior functionary who would
[Guest]: put out an order to Serum Institute that we prohibit you from selling to any private person.
[Guest]: And then suddenly you got an environment where private persons are prohibited from importing,
[Guest]: private persons are prohibited from buying from Serum. And then we are in the grip of
[Guest]: only one channel, that is the union government led immunization effort. And if it had worked,
[Guest]: great, but we were putting all our eggs in one basket.
[Guest]: So I think for all of us for the future, there are some larger meta lessons. And three meta
[Guest]: lessons that I would encourage us to think about is that we should consider it possible
[Guest]: that there can be state failure. We should not put all our eggs in one basket. We should
[Guest]: always have many, many initiatives that seek to get the same thing done. And we should
[Guest]: set a high bar for knowledge and certainty and consensus and democratic legitimacy before
[Guest]: we roll out state power that coerces people. But our default should be freedom, our baseline
[Guest]: should be freedom.
[Guest]: Just to take you to a sidetrack, imagine you're sitting in some corner of rural India, and
[Guest]: you spend $500 and you buy the base station equipment of Elon Musk's broadband internet
[Guest]: provider, which is called Starlink. And you get 100 MB per second to the internet. There's
[Guest]: no market failure, you're not harming anybody, you're all alone in a rural area. And you're
[Guest]: willing to pay $100 a month and you've got yourself nice, shiny broadband connectivity
[Guest]: into any corner of the country.
[Guest]: Your presumption should be, look, you're not harming anybody else, go do whatever the hell
[Guest]: you want. Okay, so consenting adults should be free to do whatever they want. You are
[Guest]: paying $100 a month to Elon Musk, it should be free. But I suspect that by default, some
[Guest]: Indian state employee right now is thinking, no, no, no, no, no, no. First, Starlink has
[Guest]: to come and take permission from me. Without that, they can't sell this product. So, I
[Guest]: feel that's the gap that we have to cross that the default should be freedom. And the
[Guest]: exception should be interference in freedom by state power. I'm not an expert on the Constitution
[Guest]: of India, but I believe there are some elements of the drafting of the Constitution that says
[Guest]: that in the land of the free in the Republic of India, freedom will be the default, other
[Guest]: than democratically authorized interference in freedom by the state. And it's very amusing
[Guest]: that there are some laws in India, which actually start right at the outset by flipping it around.
[Guest]: Laws that say first, everything is banned, other than what I permit. And here's a list
[Guest]: of narrow permissions that I give you. So, it's very interesting that the Parliament
[Guest]: has actually flipped around the concept of constitutional freedom that was adopted by
[Guest]: the people after the Constituent Assembly.
[Amit Varma]: And that concept really didn't last long. Like I had a great episode on the First Amendment
[Amit Varma]: with Rupert Dumansingh, where you realize how right, you know, early at that time, everything
[Amit Varma]: was getting flipped around, like the sedition law, which we have with us, such a terrible
[Amit Varma]: colonial era law was actually struck down by the courts in 1950, if I remember correctly.
[Amit Varma]: And then Nehru brought it back with the First Amendment, because he wanted to handle his
[Amit Varma]: political enemies. So for all those who think of him as a sort of a great liberal, well,
[Amit Varma]: in some ways, he was because we contain multitudes, but in some ways, he was also deeply illiberal.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned the phrase consenting adults. So I'll just kind of express a pet peeve of
[Amit Varma]: mine here is that many of us somehow seem to think correctly, that no one should, you
[Amit Varma]: know, interfere with what two consenting adults do with each other, as long as they're not
[Amit Varma]: harming anybody else in the domain of your home in the domain of your bedroom. So, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you and I are having a conversation, and we're not harming anyone in the government
[Amit Varma]: barges in, we would correctly be outraged. But somehow, when it happens in the marketplace,
[Amit Varma]: when two people are having an interaction to mutual benefit, and not harming anybody
[Amit Varma]: else, then suddenly it's a government's business, and you will make all kinds of justifications
[Amit Varma]: for it. And to me, you know, interfering there is as much morally wrong as it is otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: And it is not that, you know, there should never be coercion, if you consider all coercion
[Amit Varma]: to be morally wrong, a little bit of coercion is necessary to safeguard our rights, which
[Amit Varma]: is why the state exists, but nothing beyond that. It's this really complicated thing where
[Amit Varma]: in our personal lives, if an individual came and did something to me, I would be outraged.
[Amit Varma]: But somehow the state has the right to do it. And we don't question that. And we don't
[Amit Varma]: think hard enough about it. But to sort of get back to the questions of vaccines, or
[Guest]: in fact, yeah, sorry.
[Guest]: So on vaccines, I want to complain to you and to me, and to all of us who are hearing
[Guest]: this podcast. I'm aghast at how little all of us do as individuals on getting more vaccines.
[Guest]: Somehow, it is coming to our head that the government runs some smallpox vaccination
[Guest]: and some kids get vaccinated. And apart from that, vaccines are not part of our world.
[Guest]: And in my opinion, that's really a personal selfish mistake by each of us. Every boy and
[Guest]: girl at age 12 should get an HPV vaccine. It's in your self-interest. It may cost money,
[Guest]: you should put down good money and get it and so on. So there are so many good vaccines
[Guest]: that are available in the world today that will protect us. By the way, I only recently
[Guest]: discovered that abroad, there is a good dengue vaccine. The next time I travel abroad, I
[Guest]: very much plan to get the dengue vaccine. It's not available in India, but it is available
[Guest]: abroad and so on.
[Guest]: So I feel something went wrong in our thinking for all of us as a community, that we were
[Guest]: not doing this hard headed first principles thinking about what's a public good, what's
[Guest]: a private good, and I benefit when I get a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2, and I should be
[Guest]: willing to put a price to that. And we each of us can debate what am I willing to pay?
[Guest]: And then it just becomes a normal marketplace and normal market forces will work where you
[Guest]: pay a little more to have somebody come administer the vaccine in your arm at your home, or you
[Guest]: pay a little more for an air-conditioned facility, you pay a little less for a facility that's
[Guest]: out in the open, blah, blah, blah. Just normal machinery of markets would do vaccines. And
[Guest]: I just fail to understand why that has not taken root on a bigger scale. And I would
[Guest]: plead to all of us that there are so many good vaccines out there, we should be getting
[Guest]: these things. It's a free lunch. You spend some money on a vaccine, you rule out a disease
[Guest]: for X years, and we become healthier. It's a good deal. All of us should do it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, speaking of sort of free lunches, I think we both agree and I'm coming to you
[Amit Varma]: know, a weird question with this, but I think we both agree that we should do regulatory
[Amit Varma]: free rolling in the sense that by and large, I think for example, America's FDA is just
[Amit Varma]: over regulates massively and that has a cost and that's a subject for a different episode.
[Amit Varma]: You can't get more stringent than that. European regulators also often overdo it, they're incredibly
[Amit Varma]: stringent. So why the hell don't we free roll on the work that they put in when we don't
[Amit Varma]: have enough state capacity, if they have approved something, you know, we should just bring
[Amit Varma]: it in, it should be it should be an automatic approval, especially at a time like this,
[Amit Varma]: where you can't afford to wait. And this kind of vaccine nationalism, that
[Amit Varma]: nahi atma nirbhar and we will make it ourselves seems problematic to me. And it also strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that is there a danger you think and I'm thinking aloud here, that you can become a
[Amit Varma]: slave to your own message. For example, if you are a government, which is always thinking
[Amit Varma]: of narrative thinking of national pride, which is one of the, you know, core narrative elements
[Amit Varma]: of this particular dispensation. And if you're always thinking in terms of core national
[Amit Varma]: pride, and out of that, among other things, emerges made in India emerges atma nirbhar,
[Amit Varma]: then you become a slave to the message. So when you have a crisis like this, you are
[Amit Varma]: still thinking made in India, you're still thinking atma nirbhar, not out of any deep
[Amit Varma]: belief, which is, you know, backed by either reasoning or data or anything like that. But
[Amit Varma]: simply because that's part of the marketing narrative you made for yourself. And now your
[Amit Varma]: product has to fit that marketing. So do you think that there is a sort of reflexivity
[Guest]: and interplay here as well? A wise man once said that if you try to grab
[Guest]: for happiness, you will be unhappy. And the path to happiness lies in letting go and,
[Guest]: you know, living for some higher things and finding purpose in your life, and the happiness
[Guest]: will come. So if you become too desperate and chase and run the rat race, you're probably
[Guest]: not going to be particularly happy. So in similar fashion, I think, great countries
[Guest]: wear it lightly. A great country becomes great almost for free without noticing. Whereas
[Guest]: if we try too hard to puff ourselves up and claim that we are great, then we're going
[Amit Varma]: to lose something essential in that process. Right. Let's kind of come back to the current
[Amit Varma]: situation that on principles, we've agreed that this is what they should have done that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the state does what it has to do. In fact, it goes on a war footing to try to
[Amit Varma]: vaccinate as many people as it possibly can for free. But it also allows a private market
[Amit Varma]: to do its own thing. And as you pointed out, that would mean instead of two vaccines, which
[Amit Varma]: is becoming three, but instead of two or three, we'd probably have the whole array of them,
[Amit Varma]: which therefore, that greater diversity of vaccine also leads to a higher level of protection.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that didn't happen. Now, take me through the chronology, as it were, chronology, take
[Amit Varma]: me through the chronology of what's been happening here with the Serum Institute, like one of
[Amit Varma]: the early things that we heard that they're going to offer the vaccine at 150 rupees to
[Amit Varma]: the government, but they were planning to sell it in private for 1000 bucks, which I
[Amit Varma]: thought was perfectly acceptable, because many people like myself would happily have
[Amit Varma]: paid that 1000. And they were going to plunge it back into building more capacity and sort
[Amit Varma]: of ramping it up. Because as you've pointed out, they need to make about two or three
[Amit Varma]: times as many vaccines per day as they do now. And that excess capacity requires investment
[Amit Varma]: and allowing them to sell it to private parties would have allowed for that. But that route
[Amit Varma]: was completely cut off. So take me a little bit through the chronology of what's been
[Amit Varma]: happening in the last four or five months, as far as the vaccinations are concerned.
[Guest]: So in late 2020, there was a debate around these things. And the decisions of the key
[Guest]: persons were that we will use state coercion, we will block imports, we will block private
[Guest]: purchase from Serum Institute, all the output that Serum Institute sells in India shall
[Guest]: be sold only to the union government. And only the union government will go all around
[Guest]: the country, delivering the vaccine doses through state governments and hospitals and
[Guest]: other facilities. And there will be only one IT system called Coven, which will harvest
[Guest]: your data as well. And this is the union government led vaccination programme that was built.
[Guest]: By April, it was becoming clear that this had not worked out too well. The New York
[Guest]: Times has a tracker where you can go and compare the work of alternative countries. And I remember,
[Guest]: when I wrote an article about this a short while ago, you could sort the list of countries
[Guest]: by the fraction of the population that has got two doses. And India was at 1.2%. And
[Guest]: this was ranked 62 in the world. And this was particularly unlucky, given the fact that
[Guest]: India was supposed to be one of the world's great manufacturers of vaccines. So this was
[Guest]: a case where we could start to see that in the Indian private sector, there was a production
[Guest]: capability, namely Serum Institute, which had the business and intellectual genius of
[Guest]: understanding that there was a story going on here of finding a contract with AstraZeneca
[Guest]: and Oxford University.
[Guest]: So I feel we claim that it is an Indian vaccine. It is half true. There is a manufacturing
[Guest]: facility here in India. But honestly, credit where it is due, it was AstraZeneca and Oxford
[Guest]: University that developed the vaccine. And Serum Institute had the smarts to contract
[Guest]: with them. And they were able to build a reasonable production capacity. And the remainder of
[Guest]: health policy broke down. So the remainder of health policy was not able to solve this
[Guest]: puzzle correctly.
[Guest]: So they were presented with a jigsaw puzzle in late 2020. They were given a choice between
[Guest]: three alternative pathways, and they chose the wrong room in the house. And so by April,
[Guest]: it was becoming clear that these choices had not worked out. Then I think on 17th April
[Guest]: or 19th April, there were a batch of decisions where I feel in significant part, they are
[Guest]: on the right track. And I want to carefully describe what was done. And I also want to
[Guest]: defend what was done, because there is a certain kind of sentiment in the country that is unhappy
[Guest]: with this work in a way that I personally think is unfair. And I feel we need to grapple
[Guest]: with that debate also. And at the same time, in this position, there are certain elements
[Guest]: of state coercion that I think just don't make sense.
[Guest]: So what were these announcements? Step one, they said that organizations other than the
[Guest]: union government are now allowed to have their own energy and think about vaccination. So
[Guest]: please note, banning is the norm and freedom is the exception. So now the government has
[Guest]: given you the freedom that Amit Verma can organize the club of guests that have ever
[Guest]: appeared on the scene and the unseen and we can run a vaccination party at Shivaji Park.
[Guest]: So that you now have the permission to do that if you should so decide. Element two,
[Guest]: you are free to import vaccines for that purpose. So state governments and private persons are
[Guest]: now free to import vaccines for the first time. That freedom is now given to private
[Guest]: persons. And I think all this is good.
[Guest]: Next, they have a remarkable set of industrial policy and central planning rules upon vaccine
[Guest]: makers in India. So they say, whatever Serum makes, 50% of that shall be sold to me, without
[Guest]: mention to the price. And out of the remaining 50%, Serum is able to sell to state governments
[Guest]: or private people and they leave that question intact. Alongside that, there was supposed
[Guest]: to be a lot of informal pressure by the government upon Serum. Now I have no idea. I'm just reporting
[Guest]: newspaper stories. So in the end, Serum Institute came out with a formula where they said that
[Guest]: we will sell to the union government at 150 rupees and state governments at 400 rupees
[Guest]: and private people at 600 rupees. And I think yesterday or the day before they announced
[Guest]: that for state governments, we'll bring it down from 400 rupees to 300 rupees. And none
[Guest]: of these are market-based decisions. So we have an old idea in economics that there should
[Guest]: be a law of one price. Everything should be traded at one single price, partly because
[Guest]: now you're needlessly creating a black market and partly because you're getting the wrong
[Guest]: incentives that Serum will only respond to the marginal price and these constraints that
[Guest]: if they increase capacity, half of it will go to the union government at a low price
[Guest]: that messes with the gains to Serum from increasing their capacity. So that's where we are.
[Guest]: Alongside all this, we have to worry that in the short term, vaccine manufacturing is
[Guest]: not easy to change quickly. So the short term price elasticity is low, but in the medium
[Guest]: term, the price elasticity will show up. So in time, the global manufacturers and the
[Guest]: Indian manufacturers will respond and will produce more when price signals come. But
[Guest]: as long as the price signals don't come, we will not get higher quantities into India.
[Guest]: So I would love to campaign and I would love to make T-shirts and sell them, which say
[Guest]: that supply curve slope upwards, that if you pay a higher price, you get bigger quantities.
[Guest]: It's a revolutionary insight. If you think there's not enough vaccine in India, pay more.
[Guest]: It's a revolutionary idea that by paying more, you can get larger quantities.
[Amit Varma]: Right. You know, we'll go to the positive implications of these and there are many.
[Amit Varma]: But first, the continuation of a certain kind of coercion also has negative implications.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads me to a question like one point that you have, for example, made is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, foreign companies are at this moment nervous about coming to India, nervous about
[Amit Varma]: coming here because they don't know what is the legal risk? How is the regulatory environment
[Amit Varma]: going to change? Will price controls come? You know, in all of this uncertainty to actually
[Amit Varma]: invest in anything becomes a problem. Now, my question is this that when we just look
[Amit Varma]: at the Serum Institute, I think both you and I should agree that they should be allowed
[Amit Varma]: to make a reasonable profit and the government should just pump whatever money it can, because
[Amit Varma]: one, it is the state's imperative to just vaccinate as many people as fast as possible
[Amit Varma]: and just pay for it.
[Amit Varma]: And people who can pay for themselves can but otherwise just pay for it. And also serum
[Amit Varma]: should be you know, mess around too much with oh, they are making so much profit. But the
[Amit Varma]: problem still comes up is that what are the heuristics that we then apply to arrive at
[Amit Varma]: what the right price is? For example, there is no market, right? There is no supply and
[Amit Varma]: demand and it doesn't even apply here because we agree that it needs to be done nevertheless.
[Amit Varma]: So what is the right price like people are complaining about 150 600 400 they got a lot
[Amit Varma]: of mockery for saying they're coming down from 400 to 300 for philanthropic reasons,
[Amit Varma]: which was a badly worded tweet, I would say, how can we decide like, for example, if serum
[Amit Varma]: was to say 2000 per dose to the government, obviously, that would be a little bit ridiculous.
[Amit Varma]: And even if we agree the state should spend whatever is required, that would be completely
[Amit Varma]: ridiculous. At the same time to say that give it at cost price, if they were to say that
[Amit Varma]: whatever that cost price is, would also be ridiculous, because then you're changing the
[Amit Varma]: incentives completely. And in a future pandemic, we could be even worse prepared because they
[Amit Varma]: would not have ramped up their capacity and so on and so forth. So what possible heuristic
[Amit Varma]: can there be? Because it seems to me that there is now in the mind of the common person,
[Amit Varma]: frankly, even in my mind, this just seems like some kind of absurd drama that I'm giving
[Amit Varma]: to someone at 150, someone at 300, someone at 600, like what the hell is going on?
[Guest]: Yeah, if serum was the only manufacturer of this vaccine in the whole world, then the
[Guest]: market failure would be market power. And then we would be singing the language that
[Guest]: here's a monopolist, they're restricting output and jacking up the price. And we'd be thinking
[Guest]: about, you know, a competition commission class of remedies on how to deal with that
[Guest]: problem. Okay, and it's a tricky problem. It's a difficult problem. Luckily, we are
[Guest]: actually at an extremely sensible place today, that today, there are an array of choices
[Guest]: in the world market for vaccines. So serum is absolutely not a monopoly. So let me just
[Guest]: run through a sense of the market. So you'll see what is there, there is a one dose Johnson
[Guest]: and Johnson vaccine, please note, it's very convenient for remote rural India, only one
[Guest]: dose. Then there is Pfizer and Moderna, which have a problem that they require cryogenic
[Guest]: cold chain, but it's very solvable. India is a big enough rich enough country that the
[Guest]: customer can absorb all these costs. I will say number four is AstraZeneca, because there
[Guest]: are actually many, many ways in which AstraZeneca stuff is being made all over the world. Serum
[Guest]: is not the monopoly, serum is not the only AstraZeneca vaccine. And my tentative fifth
[Guest]: is Sputnik, the Russian vaccine. While there are some concerns about their testing results,
[Guest]: and while no advanced economy has as yet licensed Sputnik, my opinion and my hearsay from good
[Guest]: scientists is that Sputnik is a decent vaccine, which is not what I would say about the Chinese
[Guest]: vaccine where things are much less exciting. It does protect, but it protects less than
[Guest]: at least these five. So, there are at least five significant vaccine players in the world
[Guest]: today, and they respond to business imperatives. So, I believe one of them was told by India
[Guest]: that we will not license you. So, we will not allow you to sell in India. Similarly,
[Guest]: some of them are going to say that you need to protect us from some kinds of liability.
[Guest]: And again, we need to align with international norms and frameworks that if a vaccine is
[Guest]: licensed for emergency use, and then there are some adverse events, you need to have
[Guest]: some concept of product liability that generates a meaningful level of risk for the corporation
[Guest]: and not have crazy levels of risk for the corporation. I do not know what the answer
[Guest]: is. I will just say, we should align with what the great economies of the world do,
[Guest]: so as to make all the five compete in the Indian market. At the end of that competition,
[Guest]: I will shut up and accept the price. If it says 5,000 rupees, I will say fine. If it
[Guest]: says 5 rupees, I will say fine. I will not try to have a judgment on what is the price
[Guest]: over and beyond what a competitive market of at least five players is saying today.
[Guest]: And we are not done, because it is not the end at five. There are other vaccine projects
[Guest]: that are coming. There is one called Novovax, who also has a manufacturing contract with
[Guest]: Serum Institute in Pune. So, that is at least one-sixth, where by all accounts, it did reasonably
[Guest]: well in their trials. So, there were 150 projects that began on trying to build vaccines for
[Guest]: SARS-CoV-2. And every day, more projects are reaching the finish line in terms of approvals,
[Guest]: in terms of launches of manufacturing capacity, and the price will come down. So, I would
[Guest]: just like to say at this point, I do not think that there is a market failure. It is a business.
[Guest]: You should negotiate. Multiple people should negotiate. I do not think it should only be
[Guest]: the Indian state. I would like the Amit Verma club of guests to negotiate for 45 doses.
[Guest]: And you know, we should meet up at Shivaji Park and we should get doses into our arm.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that is a realistic plan. I am actually going to try and get 45 doses and call my
[Amit Varma]: guests. I have had many more than 45 guests. But I think you have been on enough episodes
[Amit Varma]: that if we just go by frequency, you will qualify as one of the 45 people to get whatever
[Amit Varma]: vaccine this is seen unseen vaccine. Let's quickly talk about the implications. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I'll again quote from what you have written here. And of course, I link all these
[Amit Varma]: pieces in the show notes. And at one point, you write as one of the possible implications
[Amit Varma]: of allowing private persons and state governments to import vaccines is quote, the private sector
[Amit Varma]: will surprise us with innovation and business models, billing arrangements, etc. Perhaps
[Amit Varma]: some firms will find it easier to deliver the one dose J&J vaccine in difficult locations.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps telecom companies will call their vast subscriber base and sell vaccination
[Amit Varma]: services. Private firms know how to segment the users into a large number of categories
[Amit Varma]: and device strategies for each of them. This is what a union government which solves for
[Amit Varma]: one use case is ill suited for stop code. And it seems to me that this is what we really
[Amit Varma]: need because the science is sorted. It's miraculous that we've come up with so many vaccines which
[Amit Varma]: work in so many different ways. And the science is sorted where we are stuck is with the delivery
[Amit Varma]: mechanism that the vaccines aren't enough, we need to do vaccinations. And part of that
[Amit Varma]: is, of course, making people agree to take the vaccines. And there is a lot of vaccine
[Amit Varma]: skepticism still out there, which just kind of baffles me. But apart from that, the delivery
[Amit Varma]: is one issue where you know, the state capacity has been lacking in different ways. And here,
[Amit Varma]: you are just allowing disruptors and innovators to get into the space and innovate. And this
[Amit Varma]: has a knockoff effect for the future. Because when we are hit with a pandemic again, or
[Amit Varma]: we have any other kind of health care crisis, or just in the normal course of how health
[Amit Varma]: care is delivered in the country, there will be processes and ways that will evolve out
[Amit Varma]: of this, which are beyond the conception or imagination of any central planner. So even
[Amit Varma]: more than the current imperative that hey, we need to get as many people vaccinated as
[Amit Varma]: possible. There are these knock on effects. So is this going to happen now that the government
[Amit Varma]: has said yeah, it can happen? Is this sort of the great hope which will at least help
[Guest]: us avoid the third wave?
[Guest]: So are we there yet? We're not yet there because of some problems. One is the question of legal
[Guest]: liabilities where foreign vendors are still nervous about coming into India. Second is
[Guest]: about the risk of price controls coming from the Indian government. And this could include
[Guest]: the judiciary. I believe there is one case in the Kerala High Court, one case in the
[Guest]: Bombay High Court, one case in the Supreme Court, where various private people are telling
[Guest]: a story about socialism and the rights of every single Indian citizen and demanding
[Guest]: that the price control should be either rupees 150 or zero. And if these kinds of things
[Guest]: come, then again, you've killed it. So it is not yet done. We are not yet there in terms
[Guest]: of a world of private hunger and innovation, giving you a self-organizing system that will
[Guest]: figure out vaccine delivery in a way that no government can possibly do.
[Guest]: But as you said, the essence of it is, can we bring the energy, the creativity, the innovation
[Guest]: of the Indian consumer goods companies into this? Because they know how to reach users.
[Guest]: They know how to reach families. They know how to touch the heartstrings of a mom. They
[Guest]: know how to segment consumers into different, different regions with different, different
[Guest]: behaviors and cultural characteristics, that the vaccine jingle in Tamil Nadu will be different
[Guest]: from the vaccine jingle in Kerala or within Kerala, how you talk to a Palakkad Iyer will
[Guest]: be different from how you talk to a Marthomite and so on.
[Guest]: So that is what private people do. They will think once it's a business, there will be
[Guest]: opportunities and they will find ways to deliver it, which we can't think of. So, if somebody
[Guest]: challenges us and says that, okay, the union government tried this, it didn't work, how
[Guest]: would you do it differently? My humble answer would be, I don't know. I'm not better than
[Guest]: the civil servants trying to run a state-led system. I mean, they tried. They tried to
[Guest]: design a program and they've got some IT system. They want to monopolize the information and
[Guest]: they want to run it. I don't have improvements upon them in figuring out how to run a state-led
[Guest]: system backed by coercion. But the point is that, that system has not worked well. And
[Guest]: in my humble opinion, cannot and will not work well, because India is so diverse that
[Guest]: any one union government scheme, even if it is done optimally, will hit a certain narrow
[Guest]: target audience and will not reach a large base of the population. The Indian population
[Guest]: is so diverse, you need the genius of the Indian private sector to segment, segment,
[Guest]: segment, and differentiate and come up with different kinds of products and to surprise
[Guest]: us in how this was done. To give you a telecom analogy, all of us remember how when mobile
[Guest]: phones first came, they were at 16 rupees a minute, and they were a status symbol for
[Guest]: the page three people. And at the time, the Indian government was running a village telephone
[Guest]: scheme where they were trying to get one pay phone into every village. And by the time
[Guest]: the consumer marketing people were done with this, we had a billion phones in India, and
[Guest]: we have innovations like giving 25 rupees of a top up at every panwala in India and
[Guest]: putting it into a phone. This is something no central planner could have imagined and
[Guest]: had not happened anywhere else in the world. This was just Indian grassroots innovation
[Guest]: where people close to the ground looked at their world and figured out novel solutions.
[Guest]: And I feel this is what private people can do if given a chance. I just want to underline
[Guest]: how we should not view the present vaccination problem as a one-off. The first reason for
[Guest]: this is that the SARS-CoV-2 virus is not standing still, and there are variants and there will
[Guest]: be new variants in the future. So far, the situation seems promising that generally,
[Guest]: the vaccines as known today, fare well in the research papers against the variants as
[Guest]: seen today, barring one paper which has some bad news on a vaccine developed against the
[Guest]: Wuhan variant and tested against a South African variant. Generally, these old vaccines are
[Guest]: faring well. In particular, the B.1.1.7, which is the most studied dangerous variant is reasonably
[Guest]: blocked by Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca. So, so far, things are looking good, but we should
[Guest]: plan that the virus will fight back. There will be new variants in the future. So, when
[Guest]: the variants come in the future, we will need booster doses. And so, again, establishing
[Guest]: a large-scale distribution strategy to get booster doses out in a hurry is required.
[Guest]: And that problem is harder than where we are today. Today, a lot of India has got seroprevalence.
[Guest]: So, by now, a lot of people in India have got immunity through the disease because we've
[Guest]: been living in this nightmare for 13 months. When a new variant comes through, which requires
[Guest]: a booster dose, we'd much rather go through, you know, 13 weeks of rolling out a booster
[Guest]: all over India, rather than going through a disease experience all over again. So, this
[Guest]: is a very important reason why we must lay long-term institutional foundations of a private
[Guest]: led business, where vaccines are going all around India and we normalize vaccines as
[Guest]: part of our life, so that as and when the variants come, we are more ready for that.
[Guest]: I want to note in passing that if India is a Covishield, namely AstraZeneca vaccine monoculture,
[Guest]: then we are more fragile because a variant comes along which is able to break through
[Guest]: against that one vaccine and suddenly the whole country is in trouble. Whereas, in the
[Guest]: self-organizing system, in a more private led system, where there are many different
[Guest]: vaccines, it's a more robust design. The market economy always comes up with a more robust
[Guest]: design. It's not a monoculture, it's a polyculture, but there are many, many vaccines. So, any
[Guest]: one variant will knock out some people, but will not bring the entire country down on
[Guest]: its knees at one time. So, this is one more important reason to have a vaccine polyculture
[Guest]: that would come inevitably out of a private led model, where there are many, many private
[Guest]: people shopping in the world market for many different vaccines. And we just allow that
[Guest]: to proceed, it will automatically generate many different vaccines.
[Guest]: The last point I would like to make on this is in continuation of what I said a while
[Guest]: ago. Actually, for all of us in India, we need to normalize vaccination as a part of
[Guest]: our everyday life, because there is a great array of wonderful adult vaccines that are
[Guest]: out there. And there's just something that's gone wrong in our heads ever since the smallpox
[Guest]: program that we tend to think the government does vaccination or that infants do vaccination.
[Guest]: But we don't do vaccination. I think we adults need to be doing far more vaccination.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about just this point, like what are the adult vaccines? And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what would you recommend to me and all the adult listeners of this that we should
[Amit Varma]: just go out and get now?
[Guest]: I'm not an expert on the science of it. Here are two examples off the top of my head. There
[Guest]: is a flu vaccine, which is refreshed every year by the US CDC. Vijay Khelkar's daughter,
[Guest]: who has a PhD in the subject, said to me that every time you go to America, you should get
[Guest]: a flu shot, because that gives you a refreshed flu vaccine every year. And then for about
[Guest]: a year, you're immune to the flu. So that's like one less thing to think about. And the
[Guest]: flu is a significant threat for all of us. And it's good to rule that out. That's one
[Guest]: example. I narrated another example. Dengue is actually a disease where there's a decent
[Guest]: vaccine that is there in the world. It's just not there in India for whatever reasons. And
[Guest]: again, if there is enough of a private market, maybe dengue vaccine import, maybe even manufacturing
[Guest]: at some point, will come to India. For all of us, there are four variants of dengue.
[Guest]: It is likely that most of us have not had dengue four times. So we are vulnerable to
[Guest]: one or more of those strains. And it would just be fabulous to rule out dengue fever
[Guest]: as one more thing that you need to think about. But the most exciting stuff is in the future.
[Guest]: The most exciting stuff is the incredible improvements in vaccine science that happened
[Guest]: because of SARS-CoV-2. So in the run for vaccines for SARS-CoV-2, we have understood so much
[Guest]: more about the nature of pathogens and vaccines. We may get a vaccine against many cancers
[Guest]: by going down the route of mRNA technology. We may get a vaccine against HIV, which has
[Guest]: been a holy grail since the 80s. And all in all, the giant effort to get a vaccine against
[Guest]: HIV has failed till today. But now, finally, with the mRNA technology, there is new hope
[Guest]: that an HIV vaccine might work out. Just a few weeks ago, a large-scale trial for a malaria
[Guest]: vaccine generated 77% effectiveness. So there is actually fabulous stuff that is going on
[Guest]: with vaccines. And there are at least five or ten others that I am not able to rattle
[Guest]: out right now because it is not my field. But I have it on authority from people whose
[Guest]: scientific understanding is better than mine that there is a large area of adult vaccines
[Guest]: that are available both in India and abroad. And somehow, we in India have just shut our
[Guest]: eyes to it, partly because we are in this notion that, oh, the government does everything.
[Guest]: So there is some weird concept that vaccination is a responsibility of the government. And
[Guest]: the government, of course, inadequately does a measly 25 million infants and 30 million
[Guest]: moms per year. And for the rest, the government does nothing about adults. So we are in a
[Guest]: trap. And I think we, the people, need to break out of that. And for that, the energy
[Guest]: in a completely private, market-led framework, where we view a vaccine as a public good with
[Guest]: an externality, maybe some voucherizing, is a logical way to proceed.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. Many strands in there. And in one sense, in the leaps in medical technology
[Amit Varma]: that COVID-19 sort of catalyzed, you know, some of it is mind-blowing, like the mRNA
[Amit Varma]: vaccine, the fact that, you know, you had the genome sequenced and the vaccine basically
[Amit Varma]: designed in a computer as far back as January last year. It's just mind-blowing.
[Guest]: On 16th of Jan or something, a Chinese scientist uploaded the genetic sequence for the Wuhan
[Guest]: strain of SARS-CoV-2. On the 17th of Jan, the software had been run inside Moderna and
[Guest]: they had the vaccine designed.
[Amit Varma]: Magical, mind-blowing. I mean, it's just incredible. And aside, you were speaking of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: delivery. And if you look at what the US did, it's still straight run, but you can go to
[Amit Varma]: a pharmacy and get it, you can go to a Walmart and get it, you can go to all these places
[Amit Varma]: and get it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, like we can get a mobile recharge at a Paanwala, who knows where we could get
[Amit Varma]: the vaccine for cancer whenever it's developed. I mean, obviously, there are questions of
[Amit Varma]: trust and all. And, you know, the overall point that society can solve its own problems
[Amit Varma]: most of the time is something that I just agree with so overwhelmingly.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, being an 80s kid who then saw liberalisation and saw what it did and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, you have examples of that which are so stark. I mean, back in the 80s, it took
[Amit Varma]: you five years to get a freaking phone and, you know, look at how things are now. I want
[Amit Varma]: to touch on, I think, one other major theme. And I want to go off on a little bit of a
[Amit Varma]: rant here, because I think most people just don't get it. And it's tragic, because, which
[Amit Varma]: is price controls. And the thing is, we need to understand price controls a little bit
[Amit Varma]: better, because I think a fundamental mistake many of us make when it comes to public policy
[Amit Varma]: is we confuse intention for outcome. And so many public policies are sort of judged on
[Amit Varma]: the basis of their intentions that, oh, the labour laws protect workers, and this law
[Amit Varma]: does this. And I think one of the classic example of a law like that, that has really
[Amit Varma]: bad outcomes, but great intentions are price controls. So a quick thought experiment for
[Amit Varma]: my listeners, what if the government was to come and say tomorrow, that listen, why should
[Amit Varma]: only the rich have cars, everybody should have cars. And to enable that we are putting
[Amit Varma]: a price control on cars, cars should be available only for 1000 rupees. What do you think would
[Amit Varma]: happen? Basically, what would happen is over a period of time after the existing cars are
[Amit Varma]: gone, there would be no cars because you cannot make a car for 1000 rupees. Similarly, let's
[Amit Varma]: say you set a more realistic tag of five lakhs and say anything beyond that is luxury, you
[Amit Varma]: would have a certain category of cars which you can profitably sell for five lakhs, but
[Amit Varma]: you won't have luxury cars or SUVs or whatever, as the case may be. In each case, the price
[Amit Varma]: control would have led to a shortage that happens with everything. Now there are sort
[Amit Varma]: of two effects which price controls have one is the short term effect of a shortage and
[Amit Varma]: the other has to do with incentives. I like to illustrate that by talking about Uber search
[Amit Varma]: pricing. So bear with me while I kind of quickly go through that. Let's say that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you hit the app, and there are 100 drivers and there are 100 customers who are on the
[Amit Varma]: app at that particular point in time, simplistic example, what will happen is that everybody
[Amit Varma]: gets a cab and they do whatever. Now let's say that there are 100 cabs and 300 customers.
[Amit Varma]: If you don't have search pricing, if it becomes a first come first serve, and then you know
[Amit Varma]: 100 people get their cabs, but 200 people are kind of left out in the cold, you know,
[Amit Varma]: somebody may have to catch a flight urgently in post COVID times, of course, somebody may
[Amit Varma]: need to go to the hospital urgently. And they can't do that. Well, some of the 100 who would
[Amit Varma]: have gotten that cab in the first come first serve, maybe maybe they could have walked,
[Amit Varma]: maybe they could have done something else, it wasn't so urgent for them. So you're allocating
[Amit Varma]: only on the basis of who kind of got there first. Now, here's what search pricing does,
[Amit Varma]: it does two things, it ensures that you know, the price accurately reflects the demand of
[Amit Varma]: that particular thing. So if I just want to go nearby in the neighborhood, I might think,
[Amit Varma]: hey, I'll just take an auto instead of paying so much, or I'll just take a whatever but
[Amit Varma]: somebody who wants to go to the hospital wants to go to the airport actually has the option
[Amit Varma]: of doing that. And the shortage isn't quite there because the price keeps adjusting. That's
[Amit Varma]: the immediate short term impact of a price control, where price controls create shortages.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when Uber search pricing was banned in Delhi, a friend of mine missed a flight
[Amit Varma]: because he couldn't find an Uber to get to the airport. So this kind of literally happened
[Amit Varma]: after the Chennai floods happened, people were criticizing the airlines for raising
[Amit Varma]: their prices and all of that. But the bottom line is that what would have happened if they
[Amit Varma]: didn't raise their prices first come first serve and a bunch of people kind of get stranded.
[Amit Varma]: This is only the short immediate impact shortages, there is a deeper long term impact, which
[Amit Varma]: is more problematic. What happens when a price goes up, a price carries information, it is
[Amit Varma]: a signal when a price goes up like in Uber, when a price goes up, there might be drivers
[Amit Varma]: who are sitting inactive, who might say, hey, you know, I can have my lunch later, let me
[Amit Varma]: make some money now. And they go out and they serve the need of the person to a mutual benefit.
[Amit Varma]: The supply goes up when you allow the price to express what the demand actually is. And
[Amit Varma]: we and we saw this play out earlier, when the government put a price control on stands.
[Amit Varma]: And the moment that came out, I remember tweeting that, you know, we know where this is going
[Amit Varma]: to go, there will be shortages, and there were shortages. And those shortages necessarily
[Amit Varma]: would have cost a life somewhere or the other because someone who needed a stand couldn't
[Amit Varma]: get one. But more than that, there is the unseen effect of that information of the rising
[Amit Varma]: price not going out the information being that hey, people need this, make it somebody
[Amit Varma]: make it that information simply doesn't go out there. And this is another reason why
[Amit Varma]: I think price controls when it comes to vaccines would be incredibly dangerous, especially
[Amit Varma]: in a competitive marketplace. Like you pointed out, there are sort of so many competitors.
[Amit Varma]: So one, do you have anything to add to this something that I might have missed or a nuance
[Amit Varma]: that you'd like to add? And, and two, why is this mindset still so pervasive and almost
[Amit Varma]: reflexive among policymakers, where, you know, you always want to signal your intention with
[Amit Varma]: a particular law, and you don't give a damn about what the outcome might be.
[Guest]: So I want to add two things to this. The first is that holding other things constant, we
[Guest]: read that serum faces constraints because of shortages of some particular components.
[Guest]: Okay, and it is obvious that paying more money would help. If serum got a higher price for
[Guest]: the vaccine, they will be willing to pay a higher price for that component, they will
[Guest]: go somewhere on the world market by that component rationale, some other buyer for that component.
[Guest]: And in the short term, there will be a supply response as a consequence of a higher price.
[Guest]: So that's the first point that high prices will have a small impact, even in the short
[Guest]: term, it's not as if assembly lines are fixed. So my experience with corporations and my
[Guest]: observation of corporations is that there are actually many, many fudge factors that
[Guest]: a corporation can use to change supply, you go up from one shift to two shifts, you go
[Guest]: up from two shifts to three shifts, you bump up the capacity utilization of you squeeze
[Guest]: every last bit of output of the machines. So the machines are not as fixed as meets
[Guest]: the eye. It's not like a hospital bed, which can only do one person at a time. Okay, my
[Guest]: second comment is that I think all of us tend to see serum as being here making the Covishield
[Guest]: vaccine out of thin air for free. What I feel they're not giving enough credit for is a
[Guest]: wide array of risk taking that took place ahead of time. Out of which this is one of
[Guest]: the few people that came out right. Many, many people took risks in the early stages
[Guest]: of this and I want to tell a story about SARS-CoV-1. So when SARS-CoV-1 came, it was seen as a
[Guest]: very dangerous disease. The infection fatality rate for SARS-CoV-1 is higher than the infection
[Guest]: fatality rate for SARS-CoV-2. So there was a whole energy of people who started studying
[Guest]: SARS-CoV-1 and thinking I'm going to make a vaccine for this. So there was money that
[Guest]: went into research on building vaccines into starting to build some manufacturing facilities
[Guest]: and all that. Now it so happened that in the case of SARS-CoV-1, the public health delivered.
[Guest]: The public health managed to do the trace test isolate and the epidemic went away. So
[Guest]: in effect, there was no market for drugs or vaccines for SARS-CoV-1. All the people who
[Guest]: put money into SARS-CoV-1 ended up getting nothing out of it, whether they were philanthropists
[Guest]: or they were private people. So there were private people, there were companies, there
[Guest]: were venture capitalists, there were philanthropists, there was a whole machinery that was flung
[Guest]: to SARS-CoV-1, which in the event proved to be irrelevant.
[Guest]: Turn to SARS-CoV-2. So first, there were people who were bearing the scars of the sadness
[Guest]: that had happened after SARS-CoV-1, who were saying, you know what, are you sure we want
[Guest]: to do this? Because we saw how badly that one worked out. And then many people decided
[Guest]: that, okay, let's take the risk. Let's go build a research project, a manufacturing
[Guest]: project to build a cure, to build a vaccine. More than 150 projects took off to try to
[Guest]: build a vaccine. All of them committed money into it. Many, many manufacturing facilities
[Guest]: were built. There are some seven different pathways to make a vaccine and many people
[Guest]: thought that pathway number six is going to work and I'm going to preemptively build a
[Guest]: factory in the belief that somebody is going to get a vaccine on pathway number six, and
[Guest]: then they'll come to me and ask me for the manufacturing. Many of these people have lost
[Guest]: money along the way. It just happens to be that Serum Institute, AstraZeneca is one combination
[Guest]: which came out right at the end. We should not understate the risk that they took and
[Guest]: in return for those risks, they need a fair return on their capital. And if we as a society
[Guest]: are churlish about them earning that return, this will have two consequences. The first
[Guest]: is that firms like Serum will think that it's not wise to have exposure to the Indian legal
[Guest]: political system, and they will organize themselves as a London domiciled company. And the second
[Guest]: is that in the future, private firms will be even more careful and even more circumspect
[Guest]: before building things that will be useful to the people of India.
[Amit Varma]: Words that we should pay attention to, but the point is the people who kind of make all
[Amit Varma]: the decisions regarding these things are politicians who find it more in their interest to signal
[Amit Varma]: virtue than actually, you know, reach meaningful outcomes. And you never know the counterfactual.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not as if you can, you know, look at a specific outcome.
[Guest]: So I think that one thing has changed. Okay, late 2020, I felt that the debate was just
[Guest]: pure ideology. Okay, I would just hit brick walls, where people would say, oh, how can
[Guest]: there be a price for a vaccine? Or, oh, how can you have private people doing a vaccine?
[Guest]: Or, oh, how can you have vaccine imports? Okay, these were just ideological brick walls.
[Guest]: I think the most powerful thing that has changed today is one objective metric, the New York
[Guest]: Times cross country comparison, where India is at rank 62. I think that's a powerful force
[Guest]: of accountability. So if we had comparable date, global comparisons, good quality global
[Guest]: comparisons on COVID-19, maybe things would have been different. But in the case of vaccination,
[Guest]: we have a metric, we are able to look how India is faring compared to other countries.
[Guest]: And I think that generates a good feedback loop that when policymakers will do the right
[Guest]: things, India's rank in that will improve, and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this on April 29. You know, sitting here in the thick of things, we're
[Amit Varma]: not as much in the fog of war as we were last year, this time, we know a lot more. And yet
[Amit Varma]: right now, we are in the middle of this crazy crisis that is happening in our country, which
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, like nothing I have seen in my lifetime, frankly, it's just insane. Like,
[Amit Varma]: how do you look at this? You know, we are in the middle of great trauma and great pain,
[Amit Varma]: both collectively and very often individually. But at the same time, you know, you said you
[Amit Varma]: are a natural optimist. So what are the things that kind of make you optimistic? Like in
[Amit Varma]: one sense, of course, there is a way that science is progressing by leaps and bounds,
[Amit Varma]: and that should give us hope for sure. But what gives you hope? And what gives you despair
[Amit Varma]: about whatever you have learned from this current crisis and how things are evolving?
[Guest]: Hearing about friends, and the nightmare of COVID-19 is just profoundly challenging. You
[Guest]: know, we're running out of tears. It is so difficult to deal with that. So that's the
[Guest]: everyday nightmare that we face. In terms of how this plays out, I have one important
[Guest]: disagreement with many international comparisons, most notably by the economists. Okay, so economists
[Guest]: and finance people are tending to measure normalcy in a country by the vaccination rate.
[Guest]: And I think that is incorrect, because past experience with the disease also immunizes
[Guest]: a person until they get to genuinely new variants. And my opinion is that by and large in India
[Guest]: today, we are in decent shape, that the variants that are in the fray are generally not breaking
[Guest]: through into people who have had the disease once before. So the true rate at which India
[Guest]: is changing the disease dynamics is the combination of vaccination and disease experience. And
[Guest]: that gives me a lot of hope. Then, if we manage to address these dangers of price controls,
[Guest]: and if we get private people thinking that instead of spending 45,000 rupees to buy an
[Guest]: oxygen cylinder, I should spend 4500 rupees to buy vaccination services, then that would
[Guest]: be pretty transformative. Because if 100 million people will go get vaccinated, it would do
[Guest]: a lot of good in terms of changing the disease dynamics. The vaccine shortage is less dangerous
[Guest]: than meets the eye. Because for people who've had the disease once, you only need one dose.
[Guest]: So you don't need to multiply large numbers of Indian people vaccinated multiplied by
[Guest]: two to get to the desired objective, you can make do with a lower number of vaccine doses.
[Guest]: And my last piece of optimism is that the vaccine supply situation is getting better
[Guest]: quite dramatically. Every day, the manufacturing side of the global vaccines business is learning
[Guest]: to tweak their processes and get up to higher output. And every day, more vaccine candidates
[Guest]: are finishing their trials and generally the results are pretty good. By and large, many
[Guest]: approaches that mankind has taken to find a vaccine have proved to be successful. So
[Guest]: as the days and weeks and months go by, in my opinion, vaccine availability will improve
[Guest]: significantly. We've just got to solve the barrier in our heads about paying market prices.
[Guest]: So when we buy a mobile phone, we basically look at competing choices from all over the
[Guest]: world and then we don't whine that I'm not willing to pay 10,000 rupees for a mobile
[Guest]: phone. Okay, we say that's a market discovered price. It achieves legitimacy because it was
[Guest]: discovered on a competitive market. I think the most important point about today is that
[Guest]: we are already there. There are five rival vendors who are ready to sit across the table
[Guest]: and negotiate with you as long as you give them the correct legal liability protections.
[Guest]: They can discuss maybe their factories are booked out till June, then maybe in July,
[Guest]: they'll be able to say I can give you 1 million doses in July, or whatever. It's a business
[Guest]: and we in India need to get into that arena and start playing where various Indian persons
[Guest]: are trying to buy vaccines.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to add to that and also before that, sort of come up with a clarification,
[Amit Varma]: which is that, you know, when you said that people who got the disease earlier or are
[Amit Varma]: getting vaccinated now are protected against these variants, that is very much true, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that it doesn't mean that they won't get COVID-19 again, they might get COVID-19
[Amit Varma]: again, but the severity will be much less. And I think by now there is enough credible
[Amit Varma]: data that I have seen out there saying that both Covishield and Covaxin, you know, prevent
[Amit Varma]: the disease from getting severe if you do happen to catch it after you get vaccinated.
[Amit Varma]: So please go out and get vaccinated. The other sort of point I'd like to add, which is something
[Amit Varma]: you have also made in your articles is that, you know, people will complain that okay,
[Amit Varma]: if you allow it to be sold on the private market and you know, it'll create inequalities,
[Amit Varma]: those with money will get it and so on. Two points I'd like to make there. One, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is that it is not either or, the government should on a war footing just vaccinate everyone
[Amit Varma]: for free as much as they can, but at the same time, let private parties do what they do.
[Amit Varma]: The other point is, let us say that from the private party, a rich guy who can afford whatever
[Amit Varma]: it costs is going out and getting vaccinated. He's not the only one who's benefiting. Everybody
[Amit Varma]: is benefiting. This is the kind of thing where society benefits when any individual gets
[Amit Varma]: vaccinated because of those around him. And when these people who buy their vaccinations,
[Amit Varma]: not only are others around them benefiting, they also feel confident to go out in the
[Amit Varma]: world and get about their business and the economy also benefits and again, that has
[Amit Varma]: positive externalities and others benefit as well. So, you know, we've got to kind of
[Amit Varma]: think about all these angles as well. And the government should do vouchers. Right.
[Amit Varma]: And by vouchers, what you essentially mean is that you get vouchers, you can spend it
[Guest]: on whatever vaccine you want. Correct. So, private people would get a voucher of say
[Guest]: 1000 rupees for a dose. And the private person would go to a private producer of their choice
[Guest]: and pay something, it doesn't matter what it could be 25,000 or 2000. And out of the
[Guest]: 2000 that has to be paid, 1000 would be paid in cash, 1000 would be paid as a voucher.
[Guest]: And the private vendor would get a reimbursement of 1000 rupees from the government. So, this
[Guest]: is the way to get vaccination out on scale to poor people. The government doesn't need
[Guest]: to produce schools, the government needs to give vouchers, and then parents will use the
[Guest]: vouchers and buy schooling services. In the same fashion, parents will use those vouchers
[Guest]: and buy vaccination services. So, the objective is you have either of equity, or of emphasizing
[Guest]: certain subsets of the population, such as schoolteachers, or of emphasizing some regions
[Guest]: where the epidemic is particularly bad. If you feel there are some political compulsions,
[Guest]: then you should cater to them through vouchers, rather than saying that I will do the whole
[Guest]: thing. Because the government machinery tried its best. I respect the constraints of the
[Guest]: operating environment for the officials, and they delivered rank 62 in the world. So, let's
[Guest]: have no high hopes for what a government can do.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I couldn't agree with you more. And once again, I am not someone who ever advocates
[Amit Varma]: government spending, I'm against most government spending. But in this case, we are at war.
[Amit Varma]: And for me, there are really no limits. This is a question of spending billions to save
[Amit Varma]: trillions down the line, which of course is unseen, but we have to kind of do it. Ajay,
[Amit Varma]: thanks so much for, you know, giving me so much of your time today and sharing your insights.
[Guest]: My pleasure to be here. Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes. I have linked all
[Amit Varma]: my past episodes on COVID as well as many of the insightful pieces that Ajay and others
[Amit Varma]: have written about this problem of vaccines. You can follow Ajay on Twitter at Ajay underscore
[Amit Varma]: Shah. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen at SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for listening and take care of yourself and your
[Amit Varma]: loved ones.